[[["nay, but this dotage of our general's o'erflows the measure. those his goodly eyes, that o'er the files and musters of the war have glowed like plated mars, now bend, now turn the office and devotion of their view upon a tawny front. his captain's heart, which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst the buckles on his breast, reneges all temper and is become the bellows and the fan to cool a gypsy's lust.", "look where they come. take but good note, and you shall see in him the triple pillar of the world transformed into a strumpet's fool. behold and see.", "if it be love indeed, tell me how much.", "there's beggary in the love that can be reckoned.", "i'll set a bourn how far to be beloved.", "then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.", "news, my good lord, from rome.", "grates me, the sum."], ["nay, hear them, antony. fulvia perchance is angry. or who knows if the scarce-bearded caesar have not sent his powerful mandate to you, \"do this, or this. take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that. perform 't, or else we damn thee.\"", "how, my love?", "perchance? nay, and most like. you must not stay here longer. your dismission is come from caesar. therefore hear it, antony. where's fulvia's process? caesar's, i would say both? call in the messengers. as i am egypt's queen, thou blushest, antony, and that blood of thine is caesar's homager. else so thy cheek pays shame when shrill-tongued fulvia scolds. the messengers!", "let rome in tiber melt and the wide arch of the ranged empire fall. here is my space. kingdoms are clay. our dungy earth alike feeds beast as man. the nobleness of life is to do thus, when such a mutual pair and such a twain can do 't, in which i bind, on pain of punishment, the world to weet we stand up peerless."], ["excellent falsehood! why did he marry fulvia, and not love her? i'll seem the fool i am not. antony will be himself.", "but stirred by cleopatra. now, for the love of love and her soft hours, let's not confound the time with conference harsh. there's not a minute of our lives should stretch without some pleasure now. what sport tonight?", "hear the ambassadors.", "fie, wrangling queen! whom every thing becomes to chide, to laugh, to weep, whose every passion fully strives to make itself, in thee, fair and admired! no messenger but thine, and all alone tonight we'll wander through the streets and note the qualities of people. come, my queen, last night you did desire it. speak not to us.", "is caesar with antonius prized so slight?", "sir, sometimes when he is not antony he comes too short of that great property which still should go with antony."], ["i am full sorry that he approves the common liar, who thus speaks of him at rome, but i will hope of better deeds tomorrow. rest you happy!"], ["lord alexas, sweet alexas, most anything alexas, almost most absolute alexas, where's the soothsayer that you praised so to th' queen? oh that i knew this husband, which, you say, must charge his horns with garlands!", "soothsayer!", "your will?", "is this the man? is 't you, sir, that know things?", "in nature's infinite book of secrecy a little i can read.", "show him your hand.", "bring in the banquet quickly. wine enough cleopatra's health to drink.", "good sir, give me good fortune.", "i make not, but foresee.", "pray, then, foresee me one.", "you shall be yet far fairer than you are.", "he means in flesh.", "no, you shall paint when you are old.", "wrinkles forbid!", "vex not his prescience. be attentive.", "hush!", "you shall be more beloving than beloved."], ["i had rather heat my liver with drinking.", "nay, hear him.", "good now, some excellent fortune! let me be married to three kings in a forenoon and widow them all. let me have a child at fifty, to whom herod of jewry may do homage. find me to marry me with octavius caesar, and companion me with my mistress.", "you shall outlive the lady whom you serve.", "oh, excellent! i love long life better than figs.", "you have seen and proved a fairer former fortune than that which is to approach.", "then belike my children shall have no names. prithee, how many boys and wenches must i have?", "if every of your wishes had a womb, and fertile every wish, a million.", "out, fool! i forgive thee for a witch.", "you think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.", "nay, come, tell iras hers.", "we'll know all our fortunes.", "mine, and most of our fortunes tonight, shall be drunk to bed.", "there's a palm presages chastity, if nothing else."], ["e'en as the o'erflowing nilus presageth famine.", "go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.", "nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication, i cannot scratch mine ear. prithee, tell her but a workaday fortune.", "your fortunes are alike.", "but how, but how? give me particulars.", "i have said.", "am i not an inch of fortune better than she?", "well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than i, where would you choose it?", "not in my husband's nose.", "our worser thoughts heavens mend. alexas! come, his fortune, his fortune! oh, let him marry a woman that cannot go, sweet isis, i beseech thee, and let her die too, and give him a worse, and let worse follow worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing to his grave, fifty-fold a cuckold! good isis, hear me this prayer, though thou deny me a matter of more weight, good isis, i beseech thee!", "amen, dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people! for, as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose-wived, so it is a deadly sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckolded. therefore, dear isis, keep decorum, and fortune him accordingly."], ["amen.", "lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a cuckold, they would make themselves whores but they'd do 't.", "hush! here comes antony.", "not he. the queen.", "saw you my lord?", "no, lady.", "was he not here?", "no, madam.", "he was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden a roman thought hath struck him. enobarbus!", "madam?", "seek him and bring him hither. where's alexas?", "here at your service. my lord approaches.", "we will not look upon him. go with us.", "fulvia thy wife first came into the field.", "against my brother lucius?", "ay. but soon that war had end, and the time's state made friends of them, joining their force 'gainst caesar, whose better issue in the war from italy upon the first encounter drave them."], ["well, what worst?", "the nature of bad news infects the teller.", "when it concerns the fool or coward. on. things that are past are done, with me. 'tis thus: who tells me true, though in his tale lie death, i hear him as he flattered.", "labienus this is stiff news hath with his parthian force extended asia: from euphrates his conquering banner shook, from syria to lydia and to ionia, whilst", "\"antony,\" thou wouldst say.", "o my lord!", "speak to me home. mince not the general tongue. name cleopatra as she is called in rome. rail thou in fulvia's phrase, and taunt my faults with such full license as both truth and malice have power to utter. oh, then we bring forth weeds when our quick minds lie still, and our ills told us is as our earing.", "fare thee well awhile."], ["at your noble pleasure.", "from sicyon, how, the news? speak there.", "the man from sicyon", "is there such an one?", "he stays upon your will.", "let him appear.", "these strong egyptian fetters i must break, or lose myself in dotage.", "what are you?", "fulvia thy wife is dead.", "where died she?", "in sicyon. her length of sickness, with what else more serious importeth thee to know, this bears.", "forbear me.", "there's a great spirit gone! thus did i desire it. what our contempts doth often hurl from us we wish it ours again. the present pleasure, by revolution lowering, does become the opposite of itself. she's good, being gone. the hand could pluck her back that shoved her on. i must from this enchanting queen break off. ten thousand harms, more than the ills i know my idleness doth hatch. how now, enobarbus!"], ["what's your pleasure, sir?", "i must with haste from hence.", "why, then, we kill all our women. we see how mortal an unkindness is to them. if they suffer our departure, death's the word.", "i must be gone.", "under a compelling occasion, let women die. it were pity to cast them away for nothing, though between them and a great cause they should be esteemed nothing. cleopatra, catching but the least noise of this, dies instantly. i have seen her die twenty times upon far poorer moment. i do think there is mettle in death, which commits some loving act upon her, she hath such a celerity in dying.", "she is cunning past man's thought.", "alack, sir, no, her passions are made of nothing but the finest part of pure love. we cannot call her winds and waters sighs and tears. they are greater storms and tempests than almanacs can report. this cannot be cunning in her. if it be, she makes a shower of rain as well as jove.", "would i had never seen her!", "o sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work which not to have been blessed withal would have discredited your travel."], ["fulvia is dead.", "sir?", "fulvia is dead.", "fulvia?", "dead.", "why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. when it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man from him, it shows to man the tailors of the earth, comforting therein, that when old robes are worn out, there are members to make new. if there were no more women but fulvia, then had you indeed a cut, and the case to be lamented. this grief is crowned with consolation. your old smock brings forth a new petticoat, and indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow.", "the business she hath broached in the state cannot endure my absence.", "and the business you have broached here cannot be without you, especially that of cleopatra's, which wholly depends on your abode.", "no more light answers. let our officers have notice what we purpose. i shall break the cause of our expedience to the queen and get her leave to part. for not alone the death of fulvia, with more urgent touches, do strongly speak to us, but the letters too of many our contriving friends in rome petition us at home. sextus pompeius hath given the dare to caesar and commands the empire of the sea. our slippery people, whose love is never linked to the deserver till his deserts are past, begin to throw pompey the great and all his dignities upon his son, who high in name and power, higher than both in blood and life stands up for the main soldier, whose quality, going on, the sides o' th' world may danger. much is breeding which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life, and not a serpent's poison. say our pleasure, to such whose place is under us, requires our quick remove from hence."], ["i shall do 't."], ["where is he?", "i did not see him since.", "see where he is, who's with him, what he does. i did not send you. if you find him sad, say i am dancing. if in mirth, report that i am sudden sick. quick, and return.", "madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly, you do not hold the method to enforce the like from him.", "what should i do i do not?", "in each thing give him way. cross him in nothing.", "thou teachest like a fool the way to lose him.", "tempt him not so too far. i wish, forbear. in time we hate that which we often fear.", "but here comes antony.", "i am sick and sullen.", "i am sorry to give breathing to my purpose", "help me away, dear charmian! i shall fall. it cannot be thus long. the sides of nature will not sustain it."], ["now, my dearest queen", "pray you, stand farther from me.", "what's the matter?", "i know by that same eye there's some good news. what, says the married woman you may go? would she had never given you leave to come! let her not say 'tis i that keep you here. i have no power upon you. hers you are.", "the gods best know", "oh never was there queen so mightily betrayed! yet at the first i saw the treasons planted.", "cleopatra", "why should i think you can be mine, and true though you in swearing shake the thrond gods who have been false to fulvia? riotous madness, to be entangled with those mouth-made vows which break themselves in swearing!", "most sweet queen", "nay, pray you, seek no color for your going, but bid farewell and go. when you sued staying, then was the time for words. no going then! eternity was in our lips and eyes, bliss in our brows' bent, none our parts so poor but was a race of heaven. they are so still, or thou, the greatest soldier of the world, art turned the greatest liar."], ["how now, lady?", "i would i had thy inches. thou shouldst know there were a heart in egypt.", "hear me, queen: the strong necessity of time commands our services awhile, but my full heart remains in use with you. our italy shines o'er with civil swords. sextus pompeius makes his approaches to the port of rome. equality of two domestic powers breed scrupulous faction. the hated, grown to strength, are newly grown to love. the condemned pompey, rich in his father's honor, creeps apace into the hearts of such as have not thrived upon the present state, whose numbers threaten; and quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge by any desperate change. my more particular, and that which most with you should safe my going, is fulvia's death.", "though age from folly could not give me freedom, it does from childishness. can fulvia die?", "she's dead, my queen."], ["look here, and at thy sovereign leisure read the garboils she awaked, at the last, best, see when and where she died.", "o most false love! where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill with sorrowful water? now i see, i see, in fulvia's death how mine received shall be.", "quarrel no more, but be prepared to know the purposes i bear, which are or cease as you shall give th' advice. by the fire that quickens nilus' slime, i go from hence thy soldier, servant, making peace or war as thou affects.", "cut my lace, charmian, come! but let it be. i am quickly ill, and well, so antony loves.", "my precious queen, forbear, and give true evidence to his love which stands an honorable trial.", "so fulvia told me. i prithee, turn aside and weep for her. then bid adieu to me, and say the tears belong to egypt. good now, play one scene of excellent dissembling, and let it look like perfect honor."], ["you'll heat my blood. no more.", "you can do better yet, but this is meetly.", "now, by my sword", "and target. still he mends. but this is not the best. look, prithee, charmian, how this herculean roman does become the carriage of his chafe.", "i'll leave you, lady.", "courteous lord, one word. sir, you and i must part, but that's not it. sir, you and i have loved, but there's not it, that you know well. something it is i would oh, my oblivion is a very antony, and i am all forgotten.", "but that your royalty holds idleness your subject, i should take you for idleness itself.", "'tis sweating labor to bear such idleness so near the heart as cleopatra this. but, sir, forgive me, since my becomings kill me when they do not eye well to you. your honor calls you hence. therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly, and all the gods go with you! upon your sword sit laurel victory, and smooth success be strewed before your feet."], ["let us go. come. our separation so abides and flies that thou, residing here, goes yet with me, and i, hence fleeting, here remain with thee. away!"], ["you may see, lepidus, and henceforth know, it is not caesar's natural vice to hate our great competitor. from alexandria this is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes the lamps of night in revel; is not more manlike than cleopatra, nor the queen of ptolemy more womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or vouchsafed to think he had partners. you shall find there a man who is th' abstract of all faults that all men follow.", "i must not think there are evils enough to darken all his goodness. his faults in him seem as the spots of heaven, more fiery by night's blackness, hereditary rather than purchased, what he cannot change than what he chooses.", "you are too indulgent. let's grant, it is not amiss to tumble on the bed of ptolemy, to give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit and keep the turn of tippling with a slave, to reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet with knaves that smell of sweat. say this becomes him as his composure must be rare indeed whom these things cannot blemish yet must antony no way excuse his foils when we do bear so great weight in his lightness. if he filled his vacancy with his voluptuousness, full surfeits and the dryness of his bones call on him for 't. but to confound such time that drums him from his sport and speaks as loud as his own state and ours, 'tis to be chid as we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge, pawn their experience to their present pleasure and so rebel to judgment."], ["here's more news.", "thy biddings have been done, and every hour, most noble caesar, shalt thou have report how 'tis abroad. pompey is strong at sea, and it appears he is beloved of those that only have feared caesar. to the ports the discontents repair, and men's reports give him much wronged.", "i should have known no less. it hath been taught us from the primal state that he which is was wished until he were, and the ebbed man, ne'er loved till ne'er worth love, comes deared by being lacked. this common body, like to a vagabond flag upon the stream, goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide to rot itself with motion.", "caesar, i bring thee word menecrates and menas, famous pirates, make the sea serve them, which they ear and wound with keels of every kind. many hot inroads they make in italy the borders maritime lack blood to think on 't and flush youth revolt. no vessel can peep forth, but 'tis as soon taken as seen, for pompey's name strikes more than could his war resisted."], ["antony, leave thy lascivious wassails. when thou once wast beaten from modena, where thou slew'st hirtius and pansa, consuls, at thy heel did famine follow, whom thou fought'st against, though daintily brought up, with patience more than savages could suffer. thou didst drink the stale of horses and the gilded puddle which beasts would cough at. thy palate then did deign the roughest berry on the rudest hedge. yea, like the stag, when snow the pasture sheets, the barks of trees thou browsd. on the alps it is reported thou didst eat strange flesh, which some did die to look on. and all this it wounds thine honor that i speak it now was borne so like a soldier, that thy cheek so much as lanked not.", "'tis pity of him.", "let his shames quickly drive him to rome. 'tis time we twain did show ourselves i' th' field, and to that end assemble we immediate council. pompey thrives in our idleness."], ["tomorrow, caesar, i shall be furnished to inform you rightly both what by sea and land i can be able to front this present time.", "till which encounter it is my business too. farewell.", "farewell, my lord. what you shall know meantime of stirs abroad, i shall beseech you, sir, to let me be partaker.", "doubt not, sir. i knew it for my bond."], ["charmian!", "madam?", "ha, ha! give me to drink mandragora.", "why, madam?", "that i might sleep out this great gap of time my antony is away.", "you think of him too much.", "oh, 'tis treason!", "madam, i trust, not so.", "thou, eunuch mardian!", "what's your highness' pleasure?", "not now to hear thee sing. i take no pleasure in aught an eunuch has. 'tis well for thee that, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts may not fly forth of egypt. hast thou affections?", "yes, gracious madam.", "indeed?", "not in deed, madam, for i can do nothing but what indeed is honest to be done. yet have i fierce affections, and think what venus did with mars.", "o charmian, where think'st thou he is now? stands he or sits he? or does he walk? or is he on his horse? o happy horse, to bear the weight of antony! do bravely, horse, for wott'st thou whom thou mov'st? the demi-atlas of this earth, the arm and burgonet of men. he's speaking now, or murmuring \"where's my serpent of old nile?\" for so he calls me. now i feed myself with most delicious poison. think on me, that am with phoebus' amorous pinches black and wrinkled deep in time. broad-fronted caesar, when thou wast here above the ground, i was a morsel for a monarch. and great pompey would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow. there would he anchor his aspect, and die with looking on his life."], ["sovereign of egypt, hail!", "how much unlike art thou mark antony! yet, coming from him, that great med'cine hath with his tinct gilded thee. how goes it with my brave mark antony?", "last thing he did, dear queen, he kissed the last of many doubled kisses this orient pearl.", "his speech sticks in my heart.", "mine ear must pluck it thence.", "\"good friend,\" quoth he, \"say the firm roman to great egypt sends this treasure of an oyster, at whose foot, to mend the petty present, i will piece her opulent throne with kingdoms. all the east, say thou, shall call her mistress.\" so he nodded, and soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed, who neighed so high that what i would have spoke was beastly dumbed by him.", "what was he, sad or merry?", "like to the time o' th' year between the extremes of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry."], ["o well-divided disposition! note him, note him, good charmian, 'tis the man, but note him. he was not sad, for he would shine on those that make their looks by his. he was not merry, which seemed to tell them his remembrance lay in egypt with his joy, but between both. o heavenly mingle! be'st thou sad or merry, the violence of either thee becomes, so does it no man else. mett'st thou my posts?", "ay, madam, twenty several messengers. why do you send so thick?", "who's born that day when i forget to send to antony shall die a beggar. ink and paper, charmian. welcome, my good alexas. did i, charmian, ever love caesar so?", "oh, that brave caesar!", "be choked with such another emphasis! say, \"the brave antony.\"", "the valiant caesar!", "by isis, i will give thee bloody teeth if thou with caesar paragon again my man of men."], ["by your most gracious pardon, i sing but after you.", "my salad days, when i was green in judgment, cold in blood, to say as i said then. but, come, away. get me ink and paper. he shall have every day a several greeting, or i'll unpeople egypt."], ["if the great gods be just, they shall assist the deeds of justest men.", "know, worthy pompey, that what they do delay, they not deny.", "whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays the thing we sue for.", "we, ignorant of ourselves, beg often our own harms, which the wise powers deny us for our good, so find we profit by losing of our prayers.", "i shall do well. the people love me, and the sea is mine. my powers are crescent, and my auguring hope says it will come to th' full. mark antony in egypt sits at dinner, and will make no wars without doors. caesar gets money where he loses hearts. lepidus flatters both, of both is flattered, but he neither loves, nor either cares for him.", "caesar and lepidus are in the field. a mighty strength they carry.", "where have you this? 'tis false."], ["from silvius, sir.", "he dreams. i know they are in rome together looking for antony. but all the charms of love, salt cleopatra, soften thy wanned lip! let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both. tie up the libertine in a field of feasts, keep his brain fuming. epicurean cooks, sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite, that sleep and feeding may prorogue his honor even till a lethe'd dulness", "how now, varrius?", "this is most certain that i shall deliver: mark antony is every hour in rome expected. since he went from egypt 'tis a space for farther travel.", "i could have given less matter a better ear. menas, i did not think this amorous surfeiter would have donned his helm for such a petty war. his soldiership is twice the other twain. but let us rear the higher our opinion, that our stirring can from the lap of egypt's widow pluck the ne'er lust-wearied antony."], ["i cannot hope caesar and antony shall well greet together. his wife that's dead did trespasses to caesar. his brother warred upon him, although, i think, not moved by antony.", "i know not, menas, how lesser enmities may give way to greater. were 't not that we stand up against them all, 'twere pregnant they should square between themselves, for they have entertaind cause enough to draw their swords. but how the fear of us may cement their divisions and bind up the petty difference, we yet not know. be 't as our gods will have 't. it only stands our lives upon to use our strongest hands. come, menas."], ["good enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed, and shall become you well, to entreat your captain to soft and gentle speech.", "i shall entreat him to answer like himself. if caesar move him, let antony look over caesar's head and speak as loud as mars. by jupiter, were i the wearer of antonio's beard, i would not shave 't today.", "'tis not a time for private stomaching.", "every time serves for the matter that is then born in 't.", "but small to greater matters must give way.", "not if the small come first.", "your speech is passion. but pray you stir no embers up. here comes the noble antony.", "and yonder, caesar.", "if we compose well here, to parthia. hark, ventidius.", "i do not know, maecenas. ask agrippa."], ["noble friends, that which combined us was most great, and let not a leaner action rend us. what's amiss, may it be gently heard. when we debate our trivial difference loud, we do commit murder in healing wounds. then, noble partners, the rather for i earnestly beseech, touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms, nor curstness grow to th' matter.", "'tis spoken well. were we before our armies, and to fight, i should do thus.", "welcome to rome.", "thank you.", "sit.", "sit, sir.", "nay, then.", "i learn, you take things ill which are not so, or being, concern you not.", "i must be laughed at if or for nothing or a little, i should say myself offended, and with you chiefly i' th' world; more laughed at, that i should once name you derogately, when to sound your name it not concerned me."], ["my being in egypt, caesar, what was 't to you?", "no more than my residing here at rome might be to you in egypt. yet if you there did practice on my state, your being in egypt might be my question.", "how intend you, \"practiced\"?", "you may be pleased to catch at mine intent by what did here befall me. your wife and brother made wars upon me, and their contestation was theme for you. you were the word of war.", "you do mistake your business. my brother never did urge me in his act. i did inquire it, and have my learning from some true reports that drew their swords with you. did he not rather discredit my authority with yours, and make the wars alike against my stomach, having alike your cause? of this my letters before did satisfy you. if you'll patch a quarrel, as matter whole you have to make it with, it must not be with this.", "you praise yourself by laying defects of judgment to me, but you patched up your excuses."], ["not so, not so. i know you could not lack, i am certain on 't, very necessity of this thought, that i, your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought, could not with graceful eyes attend those wars which fronted mine own peace. as for my wife, i would you had her spirit in such another. the third o' th' world is yours, which with a snaffle you may pace easy, but not such a wife.", "would we had all such wives, that the men might go to wars with the women!", "so much uncurbable, her garboils, caesar, made out of her impatience which not wanted shrewdness of policy too i grieving grant did you too much disquiet. for that you must but say i could not help it.", "i wrote to you when rioting in alexandria. you did pocket up my letters and with taunts did gibe my missive out of audience.", "sir, he fell upon me ere admitted, then. three kings i had newly feasted, and did want of what i was i' th' morning. but next day i told him of myself, which was as much as to have asked him pardon. let this fellow be nothing of our strife. if we contend, out of our question wipe him."], ["you have broken the article of your oath, which you shall never have tongue to charge me with.", "soft, caesar.", "no, lepidus, let him speak. the honor is sacred which he talks on now, supposing that i lacked it. but, on, caesar. the article of my oath?", "to lend me arms and aid when i required them, the which you both denied.", "neglected, rather, and then when poisoned hours had bound me up from mine own knowledge. as nearly as i may i'll play the penitent to you, but mine honesty shall not make poor my greatness nor my power work without it. truth is that fulvia, to have me out of egypt, made wars here, for which myself, the ignorant motive, do so far ask pardon as befits mine honor to stoop in such a case.", "'tis noble spoken.", "if it might please you to enforce no further the griefs between ye, to forget them quite were to remember that the present need speaks to atone you."], ["worthily spoken, maecenas.", "or, if you borrow one another's love for the instant, you may, when you hear no more words of pompey, return it again. you shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.", "thou art a soldier only. speak no more.", "that truth should be silent i had almost forgot.", "you wrong this presence. therefore speak no more.", "go to, then. your considerate stone.", "i do not much dislike the matter, but the manner of his speech, for 't cannot be we shall remain in friendship, our conditions so diff'ring in their acts. yet if i knew what hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge o' th' world i would pursue it.", "give me leave, caesar.", "speak, agrippa.", "thou hast a sister by the mother's side, admired octavia. great mark antony is now a widower.", "say not so, agrippa. if cleopatra heard you, your reproof were well deserved of rashness."], ["i am not married, caesar. let me hear agrippa further speak.", "to hold you in perpetual amity, to make you brothers, and to knit your hearts with an unslipping knot, take antony octavia to his wife, whose beauty claims no worse a husband than the best of men, whose virtue and whose general graces speak that which none else can utter. by this marriage, all little jealousies, which now seem great, and all great fears, which now import their dangers, would then be nothing. truths would be tales, where now half-tales be truths. her love to both would each to other and all loves to both draw after her. pardon what i have spoke, for 'tis a studied, not a present thought, by duty ruminated.", "will caesar speak?", "not till he hears how antony is touched with what is spoke already.", "what power is in agrippa if i would say, \"agrippa, be it so,\" to make this good?"], ["the power of caesar, and his power unto octavia.", "may i never to this good purpose, that so fairly shows, dream of impediment! let me have thy hand further this act of grace, and from this hour the heart of brothers govern in our loves and sway our great designs!", "there's my hand.", "a sister i bequeath you whom no brother did ever love so dearly. let her live to join our kingdoms and our hearts, and never fly off our loves again!", "happily, amen!", "i did not think to draw my sword 'gainst pompey, for he hath laid strange courtesies and great of late upon me. i must thank him only, lest my remembrance suffer ill report; at heel of that, defy him.", "time calls upon 's. of us must pompey presently be sought, or else he seeks out us."], ["where lies he?", "about the mount misena.", "what is his strength by land?", "great and increasing. but by sea he is an absolute master.", "so is the fame. would we had spoke together! haste we for it. yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we the business we have talked of.", "with most gladness, and do invite you to my sister's view, whither straight i'll lead you.", "let us, lepidus, not lack your company.", "noble antony, not sickness should detain me.", "welcome from egypt, sir.", "half the heart of caesar, worthy maecenas! my honorable friend, agrippa.", "good enobarbus!", "we have cause to be glad that matters are so well digested. you stayed well by 't in egypt.", "ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance and made the night light with drinking."], ["eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast and but twelve persons there! is this true?", "this was but as a fly by an eagle. we had much more monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.", "she's a most triumphant lady, if report be square to her.", "when she first met mark antony, she pursed up his heart upon the river of cydnus.", "there she appeared indeed, or my reporter devised well for her.", "i will tell you. the barge she sat in, like a burnished throne, burned on the water. the poop was beaten gold, purple the sails, and so perfumd that the winds were lovesick with them. the oars were silver, which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made the water which they beat to follow faster, as amorous of their strokes. for her own person, it beggared all description: she did lie in her pavilion cloth-of-gold, of tissue o'erpicturing that venus where we see the fancy outwork nature. on each side her stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling cupids, with divers-colored fans, whose wind did seem to glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool, and what they undid did."], ["oh, rare for antony!", "her gentlewomen, like the nereides, so many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes, and made their bends adornings. at the helm a seeming mermaid steers. the silken tackle swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands that yarely frame the office. from the barge a strange invisible perfume hits the sense of the adjacent wharfs. the city cast her people out upon her, and antony, enthroned i' th' marketplace, did sit alone, whistling to th' air, which, but for vacancy, had gone to gaze on cleopatra too and made a gap in nature.", "rare egyptian!", "upon her landing, antony sent to her, invited her to supper. she replied it should be better he became her guest, which she entreated. our courteous antony, whom ne'er the word of \"no\" woman heard speak, being barbered ten times o'er, goes to the feast, and for his ordinary pays his heart for what his eyes eat only."], ["royal wench! she made great caesar lay his sword to bed. he plowed her, and she cropped.", "i saw her once hop forty paces through the public street, and having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted, that she did make defect perfection, and, breathless, pour breathe forth.", "now antony must leave her utterly.", "never. he will not. age cannot wither her, nor custom stale her infinite variety. other women cloy the appetites they feed, but she makes hungry where most she satisfies, for vilest things become themselves in her, that the holy priests bless her when she is riggish.", "if beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settle the heart of antony, octavia is a blessd lottery to him.", "let us go. good enobarbus, make yourself my guest whilst you abide here.", "humbly, sir, i thank you."], [], ["the world and my great office will sometimes divide me from your bosom.", "all which time before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers to them for you.", "good night, sir. my octavia, read not my blemishes in the world's report. i have not kept my square, but that to come shall all be done by th' rule. good night, dear lady. good night, sir.", "good night.", "now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in egypt?", "would i had never come from thence, nor you thither.", "if you can, your reason?", "i see it in my motion, have it not in my tongue. but yet hie you to egypt again.", "say to me whose fortunes shall rise higher, caesar's or mine?", "caesar's. therefore, o antony, stay not by his side. thy dmon that thy spirit which keeps thee is noble, courageous, high, unmatchable where caesar's is not. but near him thy angel becomes afeard, as being o'erpowered. therefore make space enough between you."], ["speak this no more.", "to none but thee, no more but when to thee. if thou dost play with him at any game, thou art sure to lose, and of that natural luck he beats thee 'gainst the odds. thy luster thickens when he shines by. i say again, thy spirit is all afraid to govern thee near him, but, he away, 'tis noble.", "get thee gone. say to ventidius i would speak with him.", "he shall to parthia. be it art or hap, he hath spoken true. the very dice obey him, and in our sports my better cunning faints under his chance. if we draw lots, he speeds. his cocks do win the battle still of mine when it is all to naught, and his quails ever beat mine, inhooped, at odds. i will to egypt. and though i make this marriage for my peace, i' th' east my pleasure lies.", "o come, ventidius. you must to parthia. your commission's ready. follow me and receive 't."], [], ["trouble yourselves no further. pray you, hasten your generals after.", "sir, mark antony will e'en but kiss octavia, and we'll follow.", "till i shall see you in your soldiers' dress, which will become you both, farewell.", "we shall, as i conceive the journey, be at the mount before you, lepidus.", "your way is shorter. my purposes do draw me much about. you'll win two days upon me.", "sir, good success.", "farewell."], ["give me some music. music, moody food of us that trade in love.", "the music, ho!", "let it alone. let's to billiards. come, charmian.", "my arm is sore. best play with mardian.", "as well a woman with an eunuch played as with a woman. come, you'll play with me, sir?", "as well as i can, madam.", "and when good will is showed, though 't come too short, the actor may plead pardon. i'll none now. give me mine angle. we'll to th' river. there, my music playing far off, i will betray tawny-finned fishes. my bended hook shall pierce their slimy jaws, and as i draw them up i'll think them every one an antony and say, \"aha! you're caught.\"", "'twas merry when you wagered on your angling, when your diver did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he with fervency drew up.", "that time oh, times! i laughed him out of patience, and that night i laughed him into patience. and next morn, ere the ninth hour, i drunk him to his bed, then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst i wore his sword philippan."], ["oh, from italy! ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears, that long time have been barren.", "madam, madam", "antonio's dead! if thou say so, villain, thou kill'st thy mistress. but well and free, if thou so yield him, there is gold, and here my bluest veins to kiss a hand that kings have lipped, and trembled kissing.", "first, madam, he is well.", "why, there's more gold. but, sirrah, mark, we use to say the dead are well. bring it to that, the gold i give thee will i melt and pour down thy ill-uttering throat.", "good madam, hear me.", "well, go to, i will. but there's no goodness in thy face if antony be free and healthful, so tart a favor to trumpet such good tidings! if not well, thou shouldst come like a fury crowned with snakes, not like a formal man.", "will 't please you hear me?"], ["i have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st. yet if thou say antony lives, is well, or friends with caesar, or not captive to him, i'll set thee in a shower of gold and hail rich pearls upon thee.", "madam, he's well.", "well said.", "and friends with caesar.", "th' art an honest man.", "caesar and he are greater friends than ever.", "make thee a fortune from me.", "but yet, madam", "i do not like \"but yet.\" it does allay the good precedence. fie upon \"but yet.\" \"but yet\" is as a jailer to bring forth some monstrous malefactor. prithee, friend, pour out the pack of matter to mine ear, the good and bad together. he's friends with caesar, in state of health, thou say'st, and, thou say'st, free.", "free, madam, no. i made no such report. he's bound unto octavia.", "for what good turn?", "for the best turn i' th' bed."], ["i am pale, charmian.", "madam, he's married to octavia.", "the most infectious pestilence upon thee!", "good madam, patience.", "what say you?", "hence, horrible villain, or i'll spurn thine eyes like balls before me! i'll unhair thy head!", "thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in brine, smarting in ling'ring pickle!", "gracious madam, i that do bring the news made not the match.", "say 'tis not so, a province i will give thee and make thy fortunes proud. the blow thou hadst shall make thy peace for moving me to rage, and i will boot thee with what gift beside thy modesty can beg.", "he's married, madam.", "rogue, thou hast lived too long.", "nay then, i'll run. what mean you, madam? i have made no fault."], ["good madam, keep yourself within yourself. the man is innocent.", "some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt. melt egypt into nile, and kindly creatures turn all to serpents. call the slave again. though i am mad, i will not bite him. call!", "he is afeard to come.", "i will not hurt him. these hands do lack nobility that they strike a meaner than myself, since i myself have given myself the cause.", "come hither, sir. though it be honest, it is never good to bring bad news. give to a gracious message an host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell themselves when they be felt.", "i have done my duty.", "is he married? i cannot hate thee worser than i do if thou again say \"yes.\"", "he's married, madam."], ["the gods confound thee! dost thou hold there still?", "should i lie, madam?", "oh, i would thou didst, so half my egypt were submerged and made a cistern for scaled snakes! go, get thee hence. hadst thou narcissus in thy face, to me thou wouldst appear most ugly. he is married?", "i crave your highness' pardon.", "he is married?", "take no offense that i would not offend you. to punish me for what you make me do seems much unequal. he's married to octavia.", "oh, that his fault should make a knave of thee, that art not what th' art sure of! get thee hence. the merchandise which thou hast brought from rome are all too dear for me. lie they upon thy hand and be undone by 'em!", "good your highness, patience.", "in praising antony, i have dispraised caesar.", "many times, madam.", "i am paid for 't now. lead me from hence. i faint. o iras, charmian! 'tis no matter. go to the fellow, good alexas. bid him report the feature of octavia: her years, her inclination. let him not leave out the color of her hair. bring me word quickly."], ["let him forever go! let him not, charmian. though he be painted one way like a gorgon, the other way's a mars. bid you alexas bring me word how tall she is. pity me, charmian, but do not speak to me. lead me to my chamber."], ["your hostages i have, so have you mine, and we shall talk before we fight.", "most meet that first we come to words, and therefore have we our written purposes before us sent, which, if thou hast considered, let us know if 'twill tie up thy discontented sword and carry back to sicily much tall youth that else must perish here.", "to you all three, the senators alone of this great world, chief factors for the gods: i do not know wherefore my father should revengers want, having a son and friends, since julius caesar, who at philippi the good brutus ghosted, there saw you laboring for him. what was 't that moved pale cassius to conspire? and what made the all-honored, honest roman brutus, with the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom, to drench the capitol, but that they would have one man but a man? and that is it hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden the angered ocean foams, with which i meant to scourge th' ingratitude that despiteful rome cast on my noble father."], ["take your time.", "thou canst not fear us, pompey, with thy sails. we'll speak with thee at sea. at land, thou know'st how much we do o'ercount thee.", "at land indeed thou dost o'ercount me of my father's house, but since the cuckoo builds not for himself, remain in 't as thou mayst.", "be pleased to tell us for this is from the present how you take the offers we have sent you.", "there's the point.", "which do not be entreated to, but weigh what it is worth embraced.", "and what may follow, to try a larger fortune.", "you have made me offer of sicily, sardinia. and i must rid all the sea of pirates, then, to send measures of wheat to rome. this 'greed upon to part with unhacked edges and bear back our targes undinted.", "that's our offer."], ["know then i came before you here a man prepared to take this offer, but mark antony put me to some impatience. though i lose the praise of it by telling, you must know, when caesar and your brother were at blows, your mother came to sicily and did find her welcome friendly.", "i have heard it, pompey, and am well studied for a liberal thanks which i do owe you.", "let me have your hand.", "i did not think, sir, to have met you here.", "the beds i' th' east are soft, and thanks to you, that called me timelier than my purpose hither, for i have gained by 't.", "since i saw you last there's a change upon you.", "well, i know not what counts harsh fortune casts upon my face, but in my bosom shall she never come to make my heart her vassal."], ["well met here.", "i hope so, lepidus. thus we are agreed. i crave our composition may be written and sealed between us.", "that's the next to do.", "we'll feast each other ere we part, and let's draw lots who shall begin.", "that will i, pompey.", "no, antony, take the lot. but, first or last, your fine egyptian cookery shall have the fame. i have heard that julius caesar grew fat with feasting there.", "you have heard much.", "i have fair meanings, sir.", "and fair words to them.", "then so much have i heard. and i have heard apollodorus carried", "no more of that. he did so.", "what, i pray you?", "a certain queen to caesar in a mattress.", "i know thee now. how far'st thou, soldier?", "well, and well am like to do, for i perceive, four feasts are toward."], ["let me shake thy hand. i never hated thee. i have seen thee fight when i have envied thy behavior.", "sir, i never loved you much, but i ha' praised ye when you have well deserved ten times as much as i have said you did.", "enjoy thy plainness. it nothing ill becomes thee. aboard my galley i invite you all. will you lead, lords?", "show 's the way, sir.", "come.", "thy father, pompey, would ne'er have made this treaty. you and i have known, sir.", "at sea, i think.", "we have, sir.", "you have done well by water.", "and you by land.", "i will praise any man that will praise me, though it cannot be denied what i have done by land.", "nor what i have done by water."], ["yes, something you can deny for your own safety: you have been a great thief by sea.", "and you by land.", "there i deny my land service. but give me your hand, menas.", "if our eyes had authority, here they might take two thieves kissing.", "all men's faces are true, whatsome'er their hands are.", "but there is never a fair woman has a true face.", "no slander. they steal hearts.", "we came hither to fight with you.", "for my part, i am sorry it is turned to a drinking. pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.", "if he do, sure he cannot weep 't back again.", "you've said, sir. we looked not for mark antony here. pray you, is he married to cleopatra?", "caesar's sister is called octavia.", "true, sir. she was the wife of caius marcellus.", "but she is now the wife of marcus antonius.", "pray ye, sir?", "'tis true.", "then is caesar and he forever knit together.", "if i were bound to divine of this unity, i would not prophesy so."], ["i think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage than the love of the parties.", "i think so too. but you shall find the band that seems to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of their amity. octavia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.", "who would not have his wife so?", "not he that himself is not so, which is mark antony. he will to his egyptian dish again. then shall the sighs of octavia blow the fire up in caesar, and, as i said before, that which is the strength of their amity shall prove the immediate author of their variance. antony will use his affection where it is. he married but his occasion here.", "and thus it may be. come, sir, will you aboard? i have a health for you.", "i shall take it, sir. we have used our throats in egypt.", "come, let's away."], ["here they'll be, man. some o' their plants are ill-rooted already. the least wind i' th' world will blow them down.", "lepidus is high-colored.", "they have made him drink alms-drink.", "as they pinch one another by the disposition, he cries out, \"no more,\" reconciles them to his entreaty and himself to th' drink.", "but it raises the greater war between him and his discretion.", "why, this it is to have a name in great men's fellowship. i had as lief have a reed that will do me no service as a partisan i could not heave.", "to be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in 't, are the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.", "thus do they, sir: they take the flow o' th' nile by certain scales i' th' pyramid. they know by th' height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth or foison follow. the higher nilus swells the more it promises. as it ebbs, the seedsman upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain, and shortly comes to harvest."], ["you've strange serpents there?", "ay, lepidus.", "your serpent of egypt is bred now of your mud by the operation of your sun. so is your crocodile.", "they are so.", "sit, and some wine. a health to lepidus!", "i am not so well as i should be, but i'll ne'er out.", "not till you have slept. i fear me you'll be in till then.", "nay, certainly, i have heard the ptolemies' pyramises are very goodly things. without contradiction i have heard that.", "pompey, a word.", "say in mine ear. what is 't?", "forsake thy seat, i do beseech thee, captain, and hear me speak a word.", "forbear me till anon. this wine for lepidus!", "what manner o' thing is your crocodile?", "it is shaped, sir, like itself, and it is as broad as it hath breadth. it is just so high as it is, and moves with its own organs. it lives by that which nourisheth it, and, the elements once out of it, it transmigrates.", "what color is it of?", "of it own color too."], ["'tis a strange serpent.", "'tis so. and the tears of it are wet.", "will this description satisfy him?", "with the health that pompey gives him, else he is a very epicure.", "go hang, sir, hang! tell me of that? away! do as i bid you. where's this cup i called for?", "if for the sake of merit thou wilt hear me, rise from thy stool.", "i think th' art mad.", "the matter?", "i have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.", "thou hast served me with much faith. what's else to say? be jolly, lords.", "these quicksands, lepidus, keep off them, for you sink.", "wilt thou be lord of all the world?", "what sayst thou?", "wilt thou be lord of the whole world? that's twice.", "how should that be?", "but entertain it, and, though thou think me poor, i am the man will give thee all the world."], ["hast thou drunk well?", "no, pompey, i have kept me from the cup. thou art, if thou dar'st be, the earthly jove. whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips is thine, if thou wilt ha 't.", "show me which way.", "these three world-sharers, these competitors, are in thy vessel. let me cut the cable, and, when we are put off, fall to their throats. all there is thine.", "ah, this thou shouldst have done and not have spoke on 't! in me 'tis villainy, in thee 't had been good service. thou must know, 'tis not my profit that does lead mine honor; mine honor, it. repent that e'er thy tongue hath so betrayed thine act. being done unknown, i should have found it afterwards well done, but must condemn it now. desist, and drink.", "for this, i'll never follow thy palled fortunes more. who seeks and will not take when once 'tis offered shall never find it more."], ["this health to lepidus!", "bear him ashore. i'll pledge it for him, pompey.", "here's to thee, menas!", "enobarbus, welcome.", "fill till the cup be hid.", "there's a strong fellow, menas.", "why?", "he bears the third part of the world, man. seest not?", "the third part, then, is drunk. would it were all, that it might go on wheels!", "drink thou. increase the reels.", "come.", "this is not yet an alexandrian feast.", "it ripens towards it. strike the vessels, ho! here's to caesar.", "i could well forbear 't. it's monstrous labor when i wash my brain and it grows fouler.", "be a child o' th' time.", "possess it, i'll make answer. but i had rather fast from all four days than drink so much in one."], ["ha! my brave emperor, shall we dance now the egyptian bacchanals and celebrate our drink?", "let's ha 't, good soldier.", "come, let's all take hands till that the conquering wine hath steeped our sense in soft and delicate lethe.", "all take hands. make battery to our ears with the loud music, the while i'll place you; then the boy shall sing. the holding every man shall beat as loud as his strong sides can volley.", "", "", "what would you more? pompey, good night. good brother, let me request you off. our graver business frowns at this levity. gentle lords, let's part. you see we have burnt our cheeks. strong enobarb is weaker than the wine; and mine own tongue splits what it speaks. the wild disguise hath almost anticked us all. what needs more words? good night. good antony, your hand."], ["i'll try you on the shore.", "and shall, sir. give 's your hand.", "o antony, you have my father's house. but what? we are friends. come, down into the boat.", "take heed you fall not.", "menas, i'll not on shore.", "no, to my cabin. these drums, these trumpets, flutes! what! let neptune hear we bid a loud farewell to these great fellows. sound and be hanged, sound out!", "hoo! says 'a. there's my cap.", "hoo! noble captain, come."], ["now, darting parthia, art thou struck, and now pleased fortune does of marcus crassus' death make me revenger. bear the king's son's body before our army. thy pacorus, orodes, pays this for marcus crassus.", "noble ventidius, whilst yet with parthian blood thy sword is warm, the fugitive parthians follow. spur through media, mesopotamia, and the shelters whither the routed fly. so thy grand captain, antony, shall set thee on triumphant chariots and put garlands on thy head.", "o silius, silius, i have done enough. a lower place, note well, may make too great an act. for learn this, silius: better to leave undone than by our deed acquire too high a fame when him we serve's away. caesar and antony have ever won more in their officer than person. sossius, one of my place in syria, his lieutenant, for quick accumulation of renown, which he achieved by th' minute, lost his favor. who does i' th' wars more than his captain can becomes his captain's captain; and ambition, the soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss than gain which darkens him. i could do more to do antonius good, but 'twould offend him, and in his offense should my performance perish."], ["thou hast, ventidius, that without the which a soldier and his sword grants scarce distinction. thou wilt write to antony?", "i'll humbly signify what in his name, that magical word of war, we have effected: how with his banners and his well-paid ranks the ne'er-yet-beaten horse of parthia we have jaded out o' th' field.", "where is he now?", "he purposeth to athens, whither, with what haste the weight we must convey with's will permit, we shall appear before him. on, there. pass along!"], ["what, are the brothers parted?", "they have dispatched with pompey; he is gone. the other three are sealing. octavia weeps to part from rome. caesar is sad, and lepidus, since pompey's feast, as menas says, is troubled with the greensickness.", "'tis a noble lepidus.", "a very fine one. oh, how he loves caesar!", "nay, but how dearly he adores mark antony!", "caesar? why, he's the jupiter of men.", "what's antony? the god of jupiter.", "spake you of caesar? how, the nonpareil!", "o antony, o thou arabian bird!", "would you praise caesar, say \"caesar.\" go no further.", "indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.", "but he loves caesar best; yet he loves antony. hoo! hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot think, speak, cast, write, sing, number hoo! his love to antony. but as for caesar, kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.", "both he loves.", "they are his shards, and he ."], ["so, this is to horse. adieu, noble agrippa.", "good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.", "no further, sir.", "you take from me a great part of myself; use me well in 't. sister, prove such a wife as my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest bond shall pass on thy approof. most noble antony, let not the piece of virtue, which is set betwixt us as the cement of our love, to keep it builded, be the ram to batter the fortress of it. for better might we have loved without this mean, if on both parts this be not cherished.", "make me not offended in your distrust.", "i have said.", "you shall not find, though you be therein curious, the least cause for what you seem to fear. so the gods keep you and make the hearts of romans serve your ends. we will here part."], ["farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well. the elements be kind to thee and make thy spirits all of comfort! fare thee well.", "my noble brother!", "the april's in her eyes; it is love's spring, and these the showers to bring it on. be cheerful.", "sir, look well to my husband's house, and", "what, octavia?", "i'll tell you in your ear.", "her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can her heart inform her tongue the swan's-down feather that stands upon the swell at the full of tide and neither way inclines.", "will caesar weep?", "he has a cloud in 's face.", "he were the worse for that, were he a horse; so is he, being a man.", "why, enobarbus, when antony found julius caesar dead, he cried almost to roaring, and he wept when at philippi he found brutus slain."], ["that year indeed he was troubled with a rheum. what willingly he did confound he wailed, believe 't, till i wept too.", "no, sweet octavia, you shall hear from me still. the time shall not outgo my thinking on you.", "come, sir, come, i'll wrestle with you in my strength of love. look, here i have you.", "thus i let you go and give you to the gods.", "adieu. be happy.", "let all the number of the stars give light to thy fair way.", "farewell, farewell.", "farewell."], ["where is the fellow?", "half afeard to come.", "go to, go to. come hither, sir.", "good majesty, herod of jewry dare not look upon you but when you are well pleased.", "that herod's head i'll have! but how? when antony is gone, through whom i might command it? come thou near.", "most gracious majesty!", "didst thou behold octavia?", "ay, dread queen.", "where?", "madam, in rome. i looked her in the face, and saw her led between her brother and mark antony.", "is she as tall as me?", "she is not, madam.", "didst hear her speak? is she shrill-tongued or low?", "madam, i heard her speak. she is low-voiced.", "that's not so good. he cannot like her long."], ["like her? o isis, 'tis impossible.", "i think so, charmian. dull of tongue, and dwarfish. what majesty is in her gait? remember, if e'er thou looked'st on majesty.", "she creeps. her motion and her station are as one. she shows a body rather than a life, a statue than a breather.", "is this certain?", "or i have no observance.", "three in egypt cannot make better note.", "he's very knowing, i do perceive 't. there's nothing in her yet. the fellow has good judgment.", "excellent.", "guess at her years, i prithee.", "madam, she was a widow", "widow? charmian, hark.", "and i do think she's thirty.", "bear'st thou her face in mind? is 't long or round?", "round, even to faultiness.", "for the most part, too, they are foolish that are so. her hair, what color?"], ["brown, madam, and her forehead as low as she would wish it.", "there's gold for thee. thou must not take my former sharpness ill. i will employ thee back again; i find thee most fit for business. go make thee ready; our letters are prepared.", "a proper man.", "indeed, he is so. i repent me much that so i harried him. why, methinks, by him, this creature's no such thing.", "nothing, madam.", "the man hath seen some majesty and should know.", "hath he seen majesty? isis else defend, and serving you so long!", "i have one thing more to ask him yet, good charmian but 'tis no matter; thou shalt bring him to me where i will write. all may be well enough.", "i warrant you, madam."], ["nay, nay, octavia, not only that that were excusable, that and thousands more of semblable import but he hath waged new wars 'gainst pompey; made his will, and read it to public ear; spoke scantly of me; when perforce he could not but pay me terms of honor, cold and sickly he vented them, most narrow measure lent me. when the best hint was given him, he not took 't, or did it from his teeth.", "o my good lord, believe not all, or, if you must believe, stomach not all. a more unhappy lady, if this division chance, ne'er stood between, praying for both parts. the good gods will mock me presently, when i shall pray \"o bless my lord and husband!\" undo that prayer by crying out as loud \"o bless my brother!\" husband win, win brother prays and destroys the prayer; no midway 'twixt these extremes at all.", "gentle octavia, let your best love draw to that point which seeks best to preserve it. if i lose mine honor, i lose myself; better i were not yours than yours so branchless. but, as you requested, yourself shall go between 's. the meantime, lady, i'll raise the preparation of a war shall stain your brother. make your soonest haste; so your desires are yours."], ["thanks to my lord. the jove of power make me most weak, most weak, your reconciler! wars 'twixt you twain would be as if the world should cleave, and that slain men should solder up the rift.", "when it appears to you where this begins, turn your displeasure that way, for our faults can never be so equal that your love can equally move with them. provide your going; choose your own company and command what cost your heart has mind to."], ["how now, friend eros!", "there's strange news come, sir.", "what, man?", "caesar and lepidus have made wars upon pompey.", "this is old. what is the success?", "caesar, having made use of him in the wars 'gainst pompey, presently denied him rivality, would not let him partake in the glory of the action, and, not resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly wrote to pompey; upon his own appeal seizes him. so the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.", "then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more, and throw between them all the food thou hast, they'll grind the one the other. where's antony?", "he's walking in the garden thus, and spurns the rush that lies before him; cries, \"fool lepidus!\" and threats the throat of that his officer that murdered pompey.", "our great navy's rigged.", "for italy and caesar. more, domitius: my lord desires you presently. my news i might have told hereafter."], ["'twill be naught, but let it be. bring me to antony.", "come, sir."], ["contemning rome, he has done all this and more in alexandria. here's the manner of 't: i' th' marketplace, on a tribunal silvered, cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold were publicly enthroned. at the feet sat caesarion, whom they call my father's son, and all the unlawful issue that their lust since then hath made between them. unto her he gave the stablishment of egypt, made her of lower syria, cyprus, lydia, absolute queen.", "this in the public eye?", "i' th' common showplace, where they exercise. his sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings: great media, parthia, and armenia he gave to alexander; to ptolemy he assigned syria, cilicia, and phoenicia. she in th' habiliments of the goddess isis that day appeared, and oft before gave audience, as 'tis reported, so.", "let rome be thus informed.", "who, queasy with his insolence already, will their good thoughts call from him."], ["the people knows it, and have now received his accusations.", "who does he accuse?", "caesar, and that, having in sicily sextus pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him his part o' th' isle. then does he say he lent me some shipping, unrestored. lastly, he frets that lepidus of the triumvirate should be deposed, and, being, that we detain all his revenue.", "sir, this should be answered.", "'tis done already, and the messenger gone. i have told him, lepidus was grown too cruel, that he his high authority abused and did deserve his change. for what i have conquered, i grant him part; but then, in his armenia, and other of his conquered kingdoms, i demand the like.", "he'll never yield to that.", "nor must not then be yielded to in this.", "hail, caesar, and my lord! hail, most dear caesar!", "that ever i should call thee castaway!"], ["you have not called me so, nor have you cause.", "why have you stol'n upon us thus? you come not like caesar's sister. the wife of antony should have an army for an usher and the neighs of horse to tell of her approach long ere she did appear. the trees by th' way should have borne men, and expectation fainted, longing for what it had not. nay, the dust should have ascended to the roof of heaven, raised by your populous troops. but you are come a market-maid to rome and have prevented the ostentation of our love, which, left unshown, is often left unloved. we should have met you by sea and land, supplying every stage with an augmented greeting.", "good my lord, to come thus was i not constrained, but did it on my free will. my lord, mark antony, hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted my grievd ear withal, whereon i begged his pardon for return.", "which soon he granted, being an obstruct 'tween his lust and him."], ["do not say so, my lord.", "i have eyes upon him, and his affairs come to me on the wind. where is he now?", "my lord, in athens.", "no, my most wrongd sister. cleopatra hath nodded him to her. he hath given his empire up to a whore; who now are levying the kings o' th' earth for war. he hath assembled bocchus, the king of libya; archelaus, of cappadocia; philadelphos, king of paphlagonia; the thracian king, adallas; king manchus of arabia; king of pont; herod of jewry; mithridates, king of comagen; polemon and amyntas, the kings of mede and lycaonia, with a more larger list of scepters.", "ay me, most wretched, that have my heart parted betwixt two friends that does afflict each other!", "welcome hither. your letters did withhold our breaking forth till we perceived both how you were wrong led and we in negligent danger. cheer your heart. be you not troubled with the time, which drives o'er your content these strong necessities, but let determined things to destiny hold unbewailed their way. welcome to rome, nothing more dear to me. you are abused beyond the mark of thought, and the high gods, to do you justice, makes his ministers of us and those that love you. best of comfort, and ever welcome to us."], ["welcome, lady.", "welcome, dear madam. each heart in rome does love and pity you. only th' adulterous antony, most large in his abominations, turns you off and gives his potent regiment to a trull that noises it against us.", "is it so, sir?", "most certain. sister, welcome. pray you be ever known to patience. my dear'st sister!"], ["i will be even with thee, doubt it not.", "but why, why, why?", "thou hast forspoke my being in these wars and sayst it is not fit.", "well, is it, is it?", "is 't not denounced against us? why should not we be there in person?", "well, i could reply, if we should serve with horse and mares together, the horse were merely lost. the mares would bear a soldier and his horse.", "what is 't you say?", "your presence needs must puzzle antony, take from his heart, take from his brain, from 's time what should not then be spared. he is already traduced for levity, and 'tis said in rome that photinus, an eunuch, and your maids manage this war.", "sink rome! and their tongues rot that speak against us! a charge we bear i' th' war, and as the president of my kingdom will appear there for a man. speak not against it. i will not stay behind."], ["nay, i have done. here comes the emperor.", "is it not strange, canidius, that from tarentum and brundusium he could so quickly cut the ionian sea and take in toryne? you have heard on 't, sweet?", "celerity is never more admired than by the negligent.", "a good rebuke, which might have well becomed the best of men, to taunt at slackness. canidius, we will fight with him by sea.", "by sea, what else?", "why will my lord do so?", "for that he dares us to 't.", "so hath my lord dared him to single fight.", "ay, and to wage this battle at pharsalia, where caesar fought with pompey. but these offers, which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off, and so should you.", "your ships are not well manned, your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people engrossed by swift impress. in caesar's fleet are those that often have 'gainst pompey fought. their ships are yare, yours, heavy. no disgrace shall fall you for refusing him at sea, being prepared for land."], ["by sea, by sea.", "most worthy sir, you therein throw away the absolute soldiership you have by land, distract your army, which doth most consist of war-marked footmen, leave unexecuted your own renownd knowledge, quite forego the way which promises assurance, and give up yourself merely to chance and hazard from firm security.", "i'll fight at sea.", "i have sixty sails, caesar none better.", "our overplus of shipping will we burn, and with the rest full-manned, from th' head of actium beat th' approaching caesar. but if we fail, we then can do 't at land.", "thy business?", "the news is true, my lord. he is descried. caesar has taken toryne.", "can he be there in person? 'tis impossible, strange that his power should be. canidius, our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land, and our twelve thousand horse. we'll to our ship. away, my thetis!"], ["how now, worthy soldier?", "o noble emperor, do not fight by sea! trust not to rotten planks. do you misdoubt this sword and these my wounds? let th' egyptians and the phoenicians go a-ducking. we have used to conquer standing on the earth and fighting foot to foot.", "well, well, away.", "by hercules, i think i am i' th' right.", "soldier, thou art; but his whole action grows not in the power on 't. so our leader's led, and we are women's men.", "you keep by land the legions and the horse whole, do you not?", "marcus octavius, marcus justeius, publicola, and caelius, are for sea; but we keep whole by land. this speed of caesar's carries beyond belief.", "while he was yet in rome his power went out in such distractions as beguiled all spies."], ["who's his lieutenant, hear you?", "they say, one taurus.", "well i know the man.", "the emperor calls canidius.", "with news the time's with labor, and throws forth each minute some."], ["taurus!", "my lord?", "strike not by land; keep whole. provoke not battle till we have done at sea. do not exceed the prescript of this scroll.", "our fortune lies upon this jump."], ["set we our squadrons on yond side o' th' hill, in eye of caesar's battle, from which place we may the number of the ships behold and so proceed accordingly."], ["naught, naught, all naught! i can behold no longer. th' , the egyptian admiral, with all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder. to see 't mine eyes are blasted.", "gods and goddesses, all the whole synod of them!", "what's thy passion?", "the greater cantle of the world is lost with very ignorance. we have kissed away kingdoms and provinces.", "how appears the fight?", "on our side like the tokened pestilence, where death is sure. yon ribaudred nag of egypt whom leprosy o'ertake! i' th' midst o' th' fight, when vantage like a pair of twins appeared both as the same, or rather ours the elder, the breeze upon her, like a cow in june, hoists sails and flies.", "that i beheld. mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not endure a further view."], ["she once being loofed, the noble ruin of her magic, antony, claps on his sea-wing and, like a doting mallard leaving the fight in height, flies after her. i never saw an action of such shame. experience, manhood, honor, ne'er before did violate so itself.", "alack, alack!", "our fortune on the sea is out of breath and sinks most lamentably. had our general been what he knew himself, it had gone well. oh, he has given example for our flight most grossly by his own!", "ay, are you thereabouts? why then, good night indeed.", "toward peloponnesus are they fled.", "'tis easy to 't, and there i will attend what further comes.", "to caesar will i render my legions and my horse. six kings already show me the way of yielding."], ["i'll yet follow the wounded chance of antony, though my reason sits in the wind against me."], ["hark. the land bids me tread no more upon 't. it is ashamed to bear me. friends, come hither. i am so lated in the world that i have lost my way forever. i have a ship laden with gold. take that, divide it. fly and make your peace with caesar.", "fly? not we.", "i have fled myself, and have instructed cowards to run and show their shoulders. friends, begone. i have myself resolved upon a course which has no need of you. begone. my treasure's in the harbor. take it. oh, i followed that i blush to look upon! my very hairs do mutiny, for the white reprove the brown for rashness, and they them for fear and doting. friends, begone. you shall have letters from me to some friends that will sweep your way for you. pray you, look not sad, nor make replies of loathness. take the hint which my despair proclaims. let that be left which leaves itself. to the seaside straightway! i will possess you of that ship and treasure. leave me, i pray, a little. pray you now, nay, do so, for indeed i have lost command. therefore i pray you. i'll see you by and by."], ["nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.", "do, most dear queen.", "do. why, what else?", "let me sit down. o juno!", "no, no, no, no, no.", "see you here, sir?", "oh, fie, fie, fie!", "madam!", "madam, o good empress!", "sir, sir", "yes, my lord, yes. he at philippi kept his sword e'en like a dancer, while i struck the lean and wrinkled cassius, and 'twas i that the mad brutus ended. he alone dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had in the brave squares of war, yet now no matter.", "ah, stand by.", "the queen, my lord, the queen.", "go to him, madam, speak to him. he is unqualitied with very shame."], ["well then, sustain me. oh!", "most noble sir, arise. the queen approaches. her head's declined, and death will seize her but your comfort makes the rescue.", "i have offended reputation, a most unnoble swerving.", "sir, the queen.", "oh, whither hast thou led me, egypt? see how i convey my shame out of thine eyes by looking back what i have left behind 'stroyed in dishonor.", "o my lord, my lord, forgive my fearful sails! i little thought you would have followed.", "egypt, thou knew'st too well my heart was to thy rudder tied by th' strings, and thou shouldst tow me after. o'er my spirit thy full supremacy thou knew'st, and that thy beck might from the bidding of the gods command me.", "oh, my pardon!", "now i must to the young man send humble treaties, dodge and palter in the shifts of lowness, who with half the bulk o' th' world played as i pleased, making and marring fortunes. you did know how much you were my conqueror, and that my sword, made weak by my affection, would obey it on all cause."], ["pardon, pardon!", "fall not a tear, i say. one of them rates all that is won and lost. give me a kiss.", "even this repays me. we sent our schoolmaster. is he come back? love, i am full of lead. some wine, within there, and our viands! fortune knows we scorn her most when most she offers blows."], ["let him appear that's come from antony. know you him?", "caesar, 'tis his schoolmaster an argument that he is plucked, when hither he sends so poor a pinion of his wing, which had superfluous kings for messengers not many moons gone by.", "approach and speak.", "such as i am, i come from antony. i was of late as petty to his ends as is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf to his grand sea.", "be 't so. declare thine office.", "lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and requires to live in egypt; which not granted, he lessens his requests, and to thee sues to let him breathe between the heavens and earth a private man in athens. this for him. next, cleopatra does confess thy greatness, submits her to thy might, and of thee craves the circle of the ptolemies for her heirs, now hazarded to thy grace."], ["for antony, i have no ears to his request. the queen of audience nor desire shall fail, so she from egypt drive her all-disgracd friend or take his life there. this if she perform, she shall not sue unheard. so to them both.", "fortune pursue thee!", "bring him through the bands.", "to try thy eloquence now 'tis time. dispatch. from antony win cleopatra. promise, and in our name, what she requires. add more, from thine invention, offers. women are not in their best fortunes strong, but want will perjure the ne'er-touched vestal. try thy cunning, thidias. make thine own edict for thy pains, which we will answer as a law.", "caesar, i go.", "observe how antony becomes his flaw, and what thou think'st his very action speaks in every power that moves.", "caesar, i shall."], ["what shall we do, enobarbus?", "think and die.", "is antony or we in fault for this?", "antony only, that would make his will lord of his reason. what though you fled from that great face of war, whose several ranges frighted each other? why should he follow? the itch of his affection should not then have nicked his captainship at such a point when half to half the world opposed, he being the merd question. 'twas a shame no less than was his loss, to course your flying flags and leave his navy gazing.", "prithee, peace.", "is that his answer?", "ay, my lord.", "the queen shall then have courtesy, so she will yield us up?", "he says so.", "let her know 't. to the boy caesar send this grizzled head, and he will fill thy wishes to the brim with principalities."], ["that head, my lord?", "to him again. tell him he wears the rose of youth upon him, from which the world should note something particular. his coin, ships, legions, may be a coward's, whose ministers would prevail under the service of a child as soon as i' th' command of caesar. i dare him therefore to lay his gay caparisons apart and answer me declined, sword against sword, ourselves alone. i'll write it. follow me.", "yes, like enough, high-battled caesar will unstate his happiness and be staged to th' show against a sworder! i see men's judgments are a parcel of their fortunes, and things outward do draw the inward quality after them to suffer all alike. that he should dream, knowing all measures, the full caesar will answer his emptiness! caesar, thou hast subdued his judgment too.", "a messenger from caesar.", "what, no more ceremony? see, my women, against the blown rose may they stop their nose, that kneeled unto the buds. admit him, sir."], ["mine honesty and i begin to square. the loyalty well held to fools does make our faith mere folly. yet he that can endure to follow with allegiance a fall'n lord does conquer him that did his master conquer and earns a place i' th' story.", "caesar's will?", "hear it apart.", "none but friends. say boldly.", "so haply are they friends to antony.", "he needs as many, sir, as caesar has, or needs not us. if caesar please, our master will leap to be his friend. for us, you know whose he is we are, and that is caesar's.", "so. thus then, thou most renowned: caesar entreats not to consider in what case thou stand'st, further than he is caesar.", "go on. right royal.", "he knows that you embrace not antony as you did love, but as you feared him."], ["oh!", "the scars upon your honor therefore he does pity as constraind blemishes, not as deserved.", "he is a god and knows what is most right. mine honor was not yielded, but conquered merely.", "to be sure of that, i will ask antony. sir, sir, thou art so leaky that we must leave thee to thy sinking, for thy dearest quit thee.", "shall i say to caesar what you require of him? for he partly begs to be desired to give. it much would please him that of his fortunes you should make a staff to lean upon. but it would warm his spirits to hear from me you had left antony and put yourself under his shroud, the universal landlord.", "what's your name?", "my name is thidias.", "most kind messenger, say to great caesar this in deputation: i kiss his conqu'ring hand. tell him i am prompt to lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel. tell him, from his all-obeying breath i hear the doom of egypt."], ["'tis your noblest course. wisdom and fortune combating together, if that the former dare but what it can, no chance may shake it. give me grace to lay my duty on your hand.", "your caesar's father oft, when he hath mused of taking kingdoms in, bestowed his lips on that unworthy place as it rained kisses.", "favors? by jove that thunders! what art thou, fellow?", "one that but performs the bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest to have command obeyed.", "you will be whipped.", "approach, there! ah, you kite! now, gods and devils! authority melts from me. of late, when i cried \"ho!\" like boys unto a muss kings would start forth and cry, \"your will?\" have you no ears? i am antony yet."], ["take hence this jack and whip him.", "'tis better playing with a lion's whelp than with an old one dying.", "moon and stars! whip him. were 't twenty of the greatest tributaries that do acknowledge caesar, should i find them so saucy with the hand of she here what's her name since she was cleopatra? whip him, fellows, till like a boy, you see him cringe his face and whine aloud for mercy. take him hence.", "mark antony", "tug him away! being whipped, bring him again. this jack of caesar's shall bear us an errand to him.", "you were half blasted ere i knew you. ha! have i my pillow left unpressed in rome, forborne the getting of a lawful race, and by a gem of women, to be abused by one that looks on feeders?", "good my lord", "you have been a boggler ever. but when we in our viciousness grow hard oh, misery on 't! the wise gods seel our eyes, in our own filth drop our clear judgments, make us adore our errors, laugh at 's while we strut to our confusion."], ["oh, is 't come to this?", "i found you as a morsel cold upon dead caesar's trencher. nay, you were a fragment of gneius pompey's, besides what hotter hours, unregistered in vulgar fame, you have luxuriously picked out. for i am sure, though you can guess what temperance should be, you know not what it is.", "wherefore is this?", "to let a fellow that will take rewards and say \"god quit you!\" be familiar with my playfellow, your hand, this kingly seal and plighter of high hearts! oh, that i were upon the hill of basan, to outroar the hornd herd! for i have savage cause, and to proclaim it civilly were like a haltered neck which does the hangman thank for being yare about him.", "is he whipped?", "soundly, my lord.", "cried he? and begged he pardon?", "he did ask favor."], ["if that thy father live, let him repent thou wast not made his daughter, and be thou sorry to follow caesar in his triumph, since thou hast been whipped for following him. henceforth the white hand of a lady fever thee; shake thou to look on 't. get thee back to caesar. tell him thy entertainment. look thou say he makes me angry with him, for he seems proud and disdainful, harping on what i am, not what he knew i was. he makes me angry, and at this time most easy 'tis to do 't, when my good stars, that were my former guides, have empty left their orbs and shot their fires into th' abysm of hell. if he mislike my speech and what is done, tell him he has hipparchus, my enfranchd bondman, whom he may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture, as he shall like, to quit me. urge it thou. hence with thy stripes, begone!", "have you done yet?", "alack, our terrene moon is now eclipsed, and it portends alone the fall of antony."], ["i must stay his time.", "to flatter caesar, would you mingle eyes with one that ties his points?", "not know me yet?", "coldhearted toward me?", "ah, dear, if i be so, from my cold heart let heaven engender hail, and poison it in the source, and the first stone drop in my neck. as it determines, so dissolve my life! the next caesarion smite, till by degrees the memory of my womb, together with my brave egyptians all, by the discandying of this pelleted storm lie graveless till the flies and gnats of nile have buried them for prey!", "i am satisfied. caesar sits down in alexandria, where i will oppose his fate. our force by land hath nobly held. our severed navy too have knit again, and fleet, threat'ning most sealike. where hast thou been, my heart? dost thou hear, lady? if from the field i shall return once more to kiss these lips, i will appear in blood. i and my sword will earn our chronicle. there's hope in 't yet."], ["that's my brave lord!", "i will be treble-sinewed, -hearted, -breathed, and fight maliciously. for when mine hours were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives of me for jests; but now i'll set my teeth and send to darkness all that stop me. come, let's have one other gaudy night. call to me all my sad captains. fill our bowls once more. let's mock the midnight bell.", "it is my birthday. i had thought t' have held it poor; but since my lord is antony again, i will be cleopatra.", "we will yet do well.", "call all his noble captains to my lord.", "do so. we'll speak to them, and tonight i'll force the wine peep through their scars. come on, my queen, there's sap in 't yet. the next time i do fight i'll make death love me, for i will contend even with his pestilent scythe.", "now he'll outstare the lightning. to be furious is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood the dove will peck the estridge; and i see still a diminution in our captain's brain restores his heart. when valor preys on reason, it eats the sword it fights with. i will seek some way to leave him."], [], ["he calls me \"boy\" and chides as he had power to beat me out of egypt. my messenger he hath whipped with rods, dares me to personal combat, caesar to antony. let the old ruffian know i have many other ways to die, meantime laugh at his challenge.", "caesar must think when one so great begins to rage, he's hunted even to falling. give him no breath, but now make boot of his distraction. never anger made good guard for itself.", "let our best heads know that tomorrow the last of many battles we mean to fight. within our files there are, of those that served mark antony but late, enough to fetch him in. see it done and feast the army. we have store to do 't, and they have earned the waste. poor antony!"], ["he will not fight with me, domitius?", "no.", "why should he not?", "he thinks, being twenty times of better fortune, he is twenty men to one.", "tomorrow, soldier, by sea and land i'll fight. or i will live or bathe my dying honor in the blood shall make it live again. woo't thou fight well?", "i'll strike and cry, \"take all.\"", "well said. come on! call forth my household servants.", "let's tonight be bounteous at our meal.", "give me thy hand. thou hast been rightly honest. so hast thou, thou, and thou, and thou. you have served me well, and kings have been your fellows.", "what means this?", "'tis one of those odd tricks which sorrow shoots out of the mind."], ["and thou art honest too. i wish i could be made so many men, and all of you clapped up together in an antony, that i might do you service so good as you have done.", "the gods forbid!", "well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight. scant not my cups, and make as much of me as when mine empire was your fellow too, and suffered my command.", "what does he mean?", "to make his followers weep.", "tend me tonight. may be it is the period of your duty. haply you shall not see me more, or if, a mangled shadow. perchance tomorrow you'll serve another master. i look on you as one that takes his leave. mine honest friends, i turn you not away, but, like a master married to your good service, stay till death. tend me tonight two hours, i ask no more, and the gods yield you for 't!", "what mean you, sir, to give them this discomfort? look, they weep, and i, an ass, am onion-eyed. for shame, transform us not to women."], ["ho, ho, ho! now the witch take me if i meant it thus! grace grow where those drops fall! my hearty friends, you take me in too dolorous a sense, for i spake to you for your comfort, did desire you to burn this night with torches. know, my hearts, i hope well of tomorrow, and will lead you where rather i'll expect victorious life than death and honor. let's to supper, come, and drown consideration."], ["brother, good night. tomorrow is the day.", "it will determine one way. fare you well. heard you of nothing strange about the streets?", "nothing. what news?", "belike 'tis but a rumor. good night to you.", "well, sir, good night.", "soldiers, have careful watch.", "and you. good night, good night.", "here we. and if tomorrow our navy thrive, i have an absolute hope our landmen will stand up.", "'tis a brave army, and full of purpose.", "peace! what noise?", "list, list!", "hark!", "music i' th' air.", "under the earth.", "it signs well, does it not?", "no."], ["peace, i say! what should this mean?", "'tis the god hercules, whom antony loved, now leaves him.", "walk. let's see if other watchmen do hear what we do.", "how now, masters?", "how now? how now? do you hear this?", "ay. is 't not strange?", "do you hear, masters? do you hear?", "follow the noise so far as we have quarter; let's see how it will give off.", "content. 'tis strange."], ["eros! mine armor, eros!", "sleep a little.", "no, my chuck. eros, come, mine armor, eros!", "come, good fellow, put thine iron on. if fortune be not ours today, it is because we brave her. come.", "nay, i'll help too. what's this for?", "ah, let be, let be! thou art the armorer of my heart. false, false. this, this.", "sooth, la, i'll help. thus it must be.", "well, well, we shall thrive now. seest thou, my good fellow? go put on thy defenses.", "briefly, sir.", "is not this buckled well?", "rarely, rarely. he that unbuckles this, till we do please to doff 't for our repose, shall hear a storm. thou fumblest, eros, and my queen's a squire more tight at this than thou. dispatch. o love, that thou couldst see my wars today, and knew'st the royal occupation! thou shouldst see a workman in 't."], ["good morrow to thee. welcome. thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge. to business that we love we rise betimes and go to 't with delight.", "a thousand, sir, early though 't be, have on their riveted trim and at the port expect you.", "the morn is fair. good morrow, general.", "good morrow, general.", "'tis well blown, lads. this morning, like the spirit of a youth that means to be of note, begins betimes. so, so. come, give me that. this way. well said. fare thee well, dame.", "whate'er becomes of me, this is a soldier's kiss. rebukable and worthy shameful check it were to stand on more mechanic compliment. i'll leave thee now like a man of steel. you that will fight, follow me close. i'll bring you to 't. adieu."], ["please you retire to your chamber?", "lead me. he goes forth gallantly. that he and caesar might determine this great war in single fight! then antony but now . well, on."], ["the gods make this a happy day to antony!", "would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed to make me fight at land!", "hadst thou done so, the kings that have revolted, and the soldier that has this morning left thee, would have still followed thy heels.", "who's gone this morning?", "who? one ever near thee. call for enobarbus he shall not hear thee, or from caesar's camp say \"i am none of thine.\"", "what sayest thou?", "sir, he is with caesar.", "sir, his chests and treasure he has not with him.", "is he gone?", "most certain.", "go, eros, send his treasure after. do it. detain no jot, i charge thee. write to him i will subscribe gentle adieus and greetings. say that i wish he never find more cause to change a master. oh, my fortunes have corrupted honest men! dispatch. enobarbus!"], [], ["go forth, agrippa, and begin the fight. our will is antony be took alive. make it so known.", "caesar, i shall.", "the time of universal peace is near. prove this a prosp'rous day, the three-nooked world shall bear the olive freely.", "antony is come into the field.", "go charge agrippa plant those that have revolted in the vant, that antony may seem to spend his fury upon himself.", "alexas did revolt and went to jewry on affairs of antony, there did dissuade great herod to incline himself to caesar and leave his master antony. for this pains caesar hath hanged him. canidius and the rest that fell away have entertainment but no honorable trust. i have done ill, of which i do accuse myself so sorely that i will joy no more."], ["enobarbus, antony hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with his bounty overplus. the messenger came on my guard, and at thy tent is now unloading of his mules.", "i give it you.", "mock not, enobarbus. i tell you true. best you safed the bringer out of the host. i must attend mine office, or would have done 't myself. your emperor continues still a jove.", "i am alone the villain of the earth, and feel i am so most. o antony, thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid my better service, when my turpitude thou dost so crown with gold! this blows my heart. if swift thought break it not, a swifter mean shall outstrike thought, but thought will do 't, i feel. i fight against thee? no, i will go seek some ditch wherein to die. the foul'st best fits my latter part of life."], [], ["retire! we have engaged ourselves too far. caesar himself has work, and our oppression exceeds what we expected.", "o my brave emperor, this is fought indeed! had we done so at first, we had droven them home with clouts about their heads.", "thou bleed'st apace.", "i had a wound here that was like a \"t,\" but now 'tis made an \"h.\"", "they do retire.", "we'll beat 'em into bench-holes. i have yet room for six scotches more.", "they are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves for a fair victory.", "let us score their backs and snatch 'em up, as we take hares, behind! 'tis sport to maul a runner.", "i will reward thee once for thy sprightly comfort and tenfold for thy good valor. come thee on."], ["i'll halt after."], ["we have beat him to his camp. run one before and let the queen know of our gests.", "tomorrow, before the sun shall see 's, we'll spill the blood that has today escaped. i thank you all, for doughty-handed are you, and have fought not as you served the cause, but as 't had been each man's like mine. you have shown all hectors. enter the city. clip your wives, your friends. tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss the honored gashes whole.", "give me thy hand. to this great fairy i'll commend thy acts, make her thanks bless thee. o thou day o' the world, chain mine armed neck. leap thou, attire and all, through proof of harness to my heart, and there ride on the pants triumphing!", "lord of lords! o infinite virtue, com'st thou smiling from the world's great snare uncaught?"], ["mine nightingale, we have beat them to their beds. what, girl, though gray do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha' we a brain that nourishes our nerves and can get goal for goal of youth. behold this man. commend unto his lips thy favoring hand. kiss it, my warrior.", "he hath fought today as if a god, in hate of mankind, had destroyed in such a shape.", "i'll give thee, friend, an armor all of gold. it was a king's.", "he has deserved it, were it carbuncled like holy phoebus' car. give me thy hand. through alexandria make a jolly march. bear our hacked targets like the men that owe them. had our great palace the capacity to camp this host, we all would sup together and drink carouses to the next day's fate, which promises royal peril. trumpeters, with brazen din blast you the city's ear; make mingle with our rattling taborins, that heaven and earth may strike their sounds together, applauding our approach."], [], ["if we be not relieved within this hour, we must return to th' court of guard. the night is shiny, and they say we shall embattle by th' second hour i' th' morn.", "this last day was a shrewd one to 's.", "o bear me witness, night", "what man is this?", "stand close and list him.", "be witness to me, o thou blessd moon, when men revolted shall upon record bear hateful memory, poor enobarbus did before thy face repent.", "enobarbus?", "peace! hark further.", "o sovereign mistress of true melancholy, the poisonous damp of night disponge upon me, that life, a very rebel to my will, may hang no longer on me. throw my heart against the flint and hardness of my fault, which, being dried with grief, will break to powder and finish all foul thoughts. o antony, nobler than my revolt is infamous, forgive me in thine own particular, but let the world rank me in register a master-leaver and a fugitive. o antony! o antony!"], ["let's speak to him.", "let's hear him, for the things he speaks may concern caesar.", "let's do so. but he sleeps.", "swoons rather, for so bad a prayer as his was never yet for sleep.", "go we to him.", "awake, sir, awake. speak to us.", "hear you, sir?", "the hand of death hath raught him.", "hark, the drums demurely wake the sleepers. let us bear him to th' court of guard. he is of note. our hour is fully out.", "come on, then. he may recover yet."], ["their preparation is today by sea. we please them not by land.", "for both, my lord.", "i would they'd fight i' th' fire or i' th' air, we'd fight there too. but this it is: our foot upon the hills adjoining to the city shall stay with us. order for sea is given; they have put forth the haven, where their appointment we may best discover and look on their endeavor."], ["but being charged, we will be still by land which, as i take 't, we shall, for his best force is forth to man his galleys. to the vales, and hold our best advantage."], ["yet they are not joined. where yond pine does stand i shall discover all. i'll bring thee word straight how 'tis like to go.", "swallows have built in cleopatra's sails their nests. the auguries say they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly, and dare not speak their knowledge. antony is valiant and dejected, and by starts his fretted fortunes give him hope and fear of what he has and has not.", "all is lost! this foul egyptian hath betrayd me. my fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder they cast their caps up and carouse together like friends long lost. triple-turned whore! 'tis thou hast sold me to this novice, and my heart makes only wars on thee. bid them all fly, for when i am revenged upon my charm, i have done all. bid them all fly. begone!"], ["o sun, thy uprise shall i see no more. fortune and antony part here. even here do we shake hands. all come to this? the hearts that spanieled me at heels, to whom i gave their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets on blossoming caesar, and this pine is barked that overtopped them all. betrayed i am. oh, this false soul of egypt! this grave charm, whose eye becked forth my wars and called them home, whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end, like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose beguiled me to the very heart of loss. what, eros, eros!", "ah, thou spell! avaunt!", "why is my lord enraged against his love?", "vanish, or i shall give thee thy deserving, and blemish caesar's triumph. let him take thee and hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians! follow his chariot, like the greatest spot of all thy sex. most monsterlike be shown for poor'st diminutives, for dolts, and let patient octavia plow thy visage up with her prepard nails!"], ["'tis well th'art gone, if it be well to live, but better 'twere thou fell'st into my fury, for one death might have prevented many. eros, ho! the shirt of nessus is upon me. teach me, alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage. let me lodge lichas on the horns o' th' moon, and with those hands that grasped the heaviest club subdue my worthiest self. the witch shall die. to the young roman boy she hath sold me, and i fall under this plot. she dies for 't. eros, ho!"], ["help me, my women! oh, he's more mad than telamon for his shield. the boar of thessaly was never so embossed.", "to th' monument! there lock yourself and send him word you are dead. the soul and body rive not more in parting than greatness going off.", "to th' monument! mardian, go tell him i have slain myself. say that the last i spoke was \"antony,\" and word it, prithee, piteously. hence, mardian, and bring me how he takes my death. to th' monument!"], ["eros, thou yet behold'st me?", "ay, noble lord.", "sometimes we see a cloud that's dragonish, a vapor sometime like a bear or lion, a towered citadel, a pendant rock, a forkd mountain, or blue promontory with trees upon 't that nod unto the world and mock our eyes with air. thou hast seen these signs. they are black vesper's pageants.", "ay, my lord.", "that which is now a horse, even with a thought the rack dislimns and makes it indistinct as water is in water.", "it does, my lord.", "my good knave eros, now thy captain is even such a body. here i am antony, yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave. i made these wars for egypt, and the queen, whose heart i thought i had, for she had mine which whilst it was mine had annexed unto 't a million more, now lost she, eros, has packed cards with caesar and false-played my glory unto an enemy's triumph. nay, weep not, gentle eros. there is left us ourselves to end ourselves."], ["oh, thy vile lady! she has robbed me of my sword.", "no, antony, my mistress loved thee, and her fortunes mingled with thine entirely.", "hence, saucy eunuch! peace! she hath betrayed me and shall die the death.", "death of one person can be paid but once, and that she has discharged. what thou wouldst do is done unto thy hand. the last she spake was \"antony, most noble antony!\" then in the midst a tearing groan did break the name of antony. it was divided between her heart and lips. she rendered life, thy name so buried in her.", "dead, then?", "dead.", "unarm, eros. the long day's task is done, and we must sleep. that thou depart'st hence safe does pay thy labor richly. go.", "off, pluck off! the sevenfold shield of ajax cannot keep the battery from my heart. o, cleave, my sides! heart, once be stronger than thy continent. crack thy frail case! apace, eros, apace. no more a soldier. bruisd pieces, go. you have been nobly borne. from me awhile."], ["i will o'ertake thee, cleopatra, and weep for my pardon. so it must be, for now all length is torture. since the torch is out, lie down and stray no farther. now all labor mars what it does. yea, very force entangles itself with strength. seal then, and all is done. eros! i come, my queen. eros! stay for me. where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand, and with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze. dido and her aeneas shall want troops, and all the haunt be ours. come, eros, eros!", "what would my lord?", "since cleopatra died i have lived in such dishonor that the gods detest my baseness. i, that with my sword quartered the world, and o'er green neptune's back with ships made cities, condemn myself to lack the courage of a woman less noble mind than she which by her death our caesar tells \"i am conqueror of myself.\" thou art sworn, eros, that when the exigent should come which now is come indeed, when i should see behind me th' inevitable prosecution of disgrace and horror, that on my command, thou then wouldst kill me. do 't. the time is come. thou strik'st not me, 'tis caesar thou defeat'st. put color in thy cheek."], ["the gods withhold me! shall i do that which all the parthian darts, though enemy, lost aim and could not?", "eros, wouldst thou be windowed in great rome and see thy master thus with pleached arms, bending down his corrigible neck, his face subdued to penetrative shame, whilst the wheeled seat of fortunate caesar, drawn before him, branded his baseness that ensued?", "i would not see 't.", "come, then, for with a wound i must be cured. draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn most useful for thy country.", "o sir, pardon me!", "when i did make thee free, swor'st thou not then to do this when i bade thee? do it at once, or thy precedent services are all but accidents unpurposed. draw and come.", "turn from me then that noble countenance wherein the worship of the whole world lies.", "lo thee!"], ["my sword is drawn.", "then let it do at once the thing why thou hast drawn it.", "my dear master, my captain, and my emperor, let me say, before i strike this bloody stroke, farewell.", "'tis said, man, and farewell.", "farewell, great chief. shall i strike now?", "now, eros.", "why, there then!", "thus i do escape the sorrow of antony's death.", "thrice nobler than myself, thou teachest me, o valiant eros, what i should and thou couldst not. my queen and eros have by their brave instruction got upon me a nobleness in record. but i will be a bridegroom in my death, and run into 't as to a lover's bed. come then, and eros, thy master dies thy scholar. to do thus i learned of thee."], ["how! not dead? not dead? the guard, ho! oh, dispatch me!", "what's the noise?", "i have done my work ill, friends. oh, make an end of what i have begun!", "the star is fall'n.", "and time is at his period.", "alas, and woe!", "let him that loves me strike me dead.", "not i.", "nor i.", "nor anyone.", "thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.", "this sword but shown to caesar, with this tidings, shall enter me with him.", "where's antony?", "there, diomed, there.", "lives he? wilt thou not answer, man?"], ["art thou there, diomed? draw thy sword and give me sufficing strokes for death.", "most absolute lord, my mistress cleopatra sent me to thee.", "when did she send thee?", "now, my lord.", "where is she?", "locked in her monument. she had a prophesying fear of what hath come to pass. for when she saw which never shall be found you did suspect she had disposed with caesar, and that your rage would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead. but fearing since how it might work, hath sent me to proclaim the truth, and i am come, i dread, too late.", "too late, good diomed. call my guard, i prithee.", "what ho, the emperor's guard! the guard, what ho! come, your lord calls!", "bear me, good friends, where cleopatra bides. 'tis the last service that i shall command you.", "woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear all your true followers out."], ["most heavy day!", "nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate to grace it with your sorrows. bid that welcome which comes to punish us, and we punish it, seeming to bear it lightly. take me up. i have led you oft; carry me now, good friends, and have my thanks for all."], ["o charmian, i will never go from hence.", "be comforted, dear madam.", "no, i will not. all strange and terrible events are welcome, but comforts we despise. our size of sorrow, proportioned to our cause, must be as great as that which makes it.", "how now? is he dead?", "his death's upon him, but not dead. look out o' th' other side your monument. his guard have brought him thither.", "o sun, burn the great sphere thou mov'st in. darkling stand the varying shore o' th' world! o antony, antony, antony! help, charmian, help, iras, help! help, friends below! let's draw him hither.", "peace! not caesar's valor hath o'erthrown antony, but antony's hath triumphed on itself.", "so it should be, that none but antony should conquer antony, but woe 'tis so!"], ["i am dying, egypt, dying. only i here importune death awhile, until of many thousand kisses the poor last i lay upon thy lips.", "i dare not, dear, dear my lord, pardon, i dare not, lest i be taken. not th' imperious show of the full-fortuned caesar ever shall be brooched with me. if knife, drugs, serpents, have edge, sting, or operation, i am safe. your wife octavia, with her modest eyes and still conclusion, shall acquire no honor demuring upon me. but come, come, antony help me, my women we must draw thee up. assist, good friends.", "oh, quick, or i am gone.", "here's sport indeed! how heavy weighs my lord! our strength is all gone into heaviness, that makes the weight. had i great juno's power, the strong-winged mercury should fetch thee up and set thee by jove's side. yet come a little. wishers were ever fools. oh, come, come, come!"], ["and welcome, welcome! die when thou hast lived. quicken with kissing. had my lips that power, thus would i wear them out.", "a heavy sight!", "i am dying, egypt, dying. give me some wine and let me speak a little.", "no, let me speak, and let me rail so high that the false huswife fortune break her wheel, provoked by my offense.", "one word, sweet queen: of caesar seek your honor, with your safety oh!", "they do not go together.", "gentle, hear me. none about caesar trust but proculeius.", "my resolution and my hands i'll trust, none about caesar.", "the miserable change now at my end lament nor sorrow at, but please your thoughts in feeding them with those my former fortunes, wherein i lived the greatest prince o' th' world, the noblest, and do now not basely die, not cowardly put off my helmet to my countryman a roman by a roman valiantly vanquished. now my spirit is going. i can no more."], ["noblest of men, woo't die? hast thou no care of me? shall i abide in this dull world, which in thy absence is no better than a sty? o see, my women, the crown o' th' earth doth melt. my lord!", "oh, withered is the garland of the war. the soldier's pole is fall'n! young boys and girls are level now with men. the odds is gone, and there is nothing left remarkable beneath the visiting moon.", "oh, quietness, lady!", "she's dead too, our sovereign.", "lady!", "madam!", "o madam, madam, madam!", "royal egypt, empress!", "peace, peace, iras.", "no more but e'en a woman, and commanded by such poor passion as the maid that milks and does the meanest chares. it were for me to throw my scepter at the injurious gods, to tell them that this world did equal theirs till they had stolen our jewel. all's but naught. patience is sottish, and impatience does become a dog that's mad. then is it sin to rush into the secret house of death ere death dare come to us? how do you, women? what, what, good cheer! why, how now, charmian? my noble girls! ah, women, women! look, our lamp is spent, it's out. good sirs, take heart. we'll bury him, and then, what's brave, what's noble, let's do 't after the high roman fashion and make death proud to take us. come, away. this case of that huge spirit now is cold. ah, women, women! come. we have no friend but resolution, and the briefest end."], [], ["go to him, dolabella, bid him yield. being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks the pauses that he makes.", "caesar, i shall.", "wherefore is that? and what art thou that dar'st appear thus to us?", "i am called dercetus. mark antony i served, who best was worthy best to be served. whilst he stood up and spoke, he was my master, and i wore my life to spend upon his haters. if thou please to take me to thee, as i was to him i'll be to caesar. if thou pleasest not, i yield thee up my life.", "what is 't thou say'st?", "i say, o caesar, antony is dead.", "the breaking of so great a thing should make a greater crack. the round world should have shook lions into civil streets and citizens to their dens. the death of antony is not a single doom. in the name lay a moiety of the world."], ["he is dead, caesar, not by a public minister of justice, nor by a hird knife, but that self hand which writ his honor in the acts it did hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it, splitted the heart. this is his sword. i robbed his wound of it. behold it stained with his most noble blood.", "look you, sad friends, the gods rebuke me, but it is tidings to wash the eyes of kings.", "and strange it is that nature must compel us to lament our most persisted deeds.", "his taints and honors waged equal with him.", "a rarer spirit never did steer humanity, but you gods will give us some faults to make us men. caesar is touched.", "when such a spacious mirror's set before him, he needs must see himself.", "o antony, i have followed thee to this, but we do launch diseases in our bodies. i must perforce have shown to thee such a declining day, or look on thine. we could not stall together in the whole world. but yet let me lament with tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts that thou, my brother, my competitor in top of all design, my mate in empire, friend and companion in the front of war, the arm of mine own body, and the heart where mine his thoughts did kindle that our stars, unreconcilable, should divide our equalness to this. hear me, good friends"], ["but i will tell you at some meeter season. the business of this man looks out of him. we'll hear him what he says. whence are you?", "a poor egyptian yet, the queen my mistress, confined in all she has, her monument, of thy intents desires instruction, that she preparedly may frame herself to th' way she's forced to.", "bid her have good heart. she soon shall know of us, by some of ours, how honorable and how kindly we determine for her, for caesar cannot live to be ungentle.", "so the gods preserve thee!", "come hither, proculeius. go and say we purpose her no shame. give her what comforts the quality of her passion shall require, lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke she do defeat us, for her life in rome would be eternal in our triumph. go, and with your speediest bring us what she says and how you find of her."], ["caesar, i shall.", "gallus, go you along.", "where's dolabella, to second proculeius?", "dolabella!", "let him alone, for i remember now how he's employed. he shall in time be ready. go with me to my tent, where you shall see how hardly i was drawn into this war, how calm and gentle i proceeded still in all my writings. go with me and see what i can show in this."], ["my desolation does begin to make a better life. 'tis paltry to be caesar. not being fortune, he's but fortune's knave, a minister of her will. and it is great to do that thing that ends all other deeds, which shackles accidents and bolts up change, which sleeps and never palates more the dung, the beggar's nurse, and caesar's.", "caesar sends greeting to the queen of egypt, and bids thee study on what fair demands thou mean'st to have him grant thee.", "what's thy name?", "my name is proculeius.", "antony did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but i do not greatly care to be deceived, that have no use for trusting. if your master would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him, that majesty, to keep decorum, must no less beg than a kingdom. if he please to give me conquered egypt for my son, he gives me so much of mine own as i will kneel to him with thanks."], ["be of good cheer. you're fall'n into a princely hand. fear nothing. make your full reference freely to my lord, who is so full of grace that it flows over on all that need. let me report to him your sweet dependency, and you shall find a conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness where he for grace is kneeled to.", "pray you, tell him i am his fortune's vassal, and i send him the greatness he has got. i hourly learn a doctrine of obedience, and would gladly look him i' th' face.", "this i'll report, dear lady. have comfort, for i know your plight is pitied of him that caused it.", "you see how easily she may be surprised. guard her till caesar come.", "royal queen!", "o cleopatra! thou art taken, queen.", "quick, quick, good hands."], ["hold, worthy lady, hold! do not yourself such wrong, who are in this relieved but not betrayed.", "what, of death too, that rids our dogs of languish?", "cleopatra, do not abuse my master's bounty by th' undoing of yourself. let the world see his nobleness well acted, which your death will never let come forth.", "where art thou, death? come hither, come! come, come and take a queen worth many babes and beggars!", "oh, temperance, lady!", "sir, i will eat no meat, i'll not drink, sir. if idle talk will once be necessary, i'll not sleep neither. this mortal house i'll ruin, do caesar what he can. know, sir, that i will not wait pinioned at your master's court, nor once be chastised with the sober eye of dull octavia. shall they hoist me up and show me to the shouting varletry of censuring rome? rather a ditch in egypt be gentle grave unto me. rather on nilus' mud lay me stark naked and let the waterflies blow me into abhorring. rather make my country's high pyramides my gibbet and hang me up in chains!"], ["you do extend these thoughts of horror further than you shall find cause in caesar.", "proculeius, what thou hast done thy master caesar knows, and he hath sent for thee. for the queen, i'll take her to my guard.", "so, dolabella, it shall content me best. be gentle to her. to caesar i will speak what you shall please, if you'll employ me to him.", "say i would die.", "most noble empress, you have heard of me?", "i cannot tell.", "assuredly you know me.", "no matter, sir, what i have heard or known. you laugh when boys or women tell their dreams. is 't not your trick?", "i understand not, madam.", "i dreamt there was an emperor antony. oh, such another sleep, that i might see but such another man!"], ["if it might please ye", "his face was as the heavens, and therein stuck a sun and moon, which kept their course and lighted the little \"o,\" the earth.", "most sovereign creature", "his legs bestrid the ocean. his reared arm crested the world. his voice was propertied as all the tund spheres, and that to friends. but when he meant to quail and shake the orb, he was as rattling thunder. for his bounty, there was no winter in 't, an autumn 'twas that grew the more by reaping. his delights were dolphinlike; they showed his back above the element they lived in. in his livery walked crowns and crownets. realms and islands were as plates dropped from his pocket.", "cleopatra", "think you there was or might be such a man as this i dreamt of?", "gentle madam, no.", "you lie up to the hearing of the gods. but if there be nor ever were one such, it's past the size of dreaming. nature wants stuff to vie strange forms with fancy, yet t' imagine an antony were nature's piece 'gainst fancy, condemning shadows quite."], ["hear me, good madam. your loss is as yourself, great, and you bear it as answering to the weight. would i might never o'ertake pursued success, but i do feel, by the rebound of yours, a grief that smites my very heart at root.", "i thank you, sir. know you what caesar means to do with me?", "i am loath to tell you what i would you knew.", "nay, pray you, sir.", "though he be honorable", "he'll lead me, then, in triumph.", "madam, he will. i know 't.", "make way there! caesar!", "which is the queen of egypt?", "it is the emperor, madam.", "arise, you shall not kneel. i pray you, rise. rise, egypt.", "sir, the gods will have it thus. my master and my lord i must obey."], ["take to you no hard thoughts. the record of what injuries you did us, though written in our flesh, we shall remember as things but done by chance.", "sole sir o' th' world, i cannot project mine own cause so well to make it clear, but do confess i have been laden with like frailties which before have often shamed our sex.", "cleopatra, know we will extenuate rather than enforce. if you apply yourself to our intents, which towards you are most gentle, you shall find a benefit in this change, but if you seek to lay on me a cruelty by taking antony's course, you shall bereave yourself of my good purposes and put your children to that destruction which i'll guard them from if thereon you rely. i'll take my leave.", "and may, through all the world! 'tis yours, and we, your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall hang in what place you please. here, my good lord."], ["you shall advise me in all for cleopatra.", "this is the brief of money, plate, and jewels i am possessed of. 'tis exactly valued, not petty things admitted. where's seleucus?", "here, madam.", "this is my treasurer. let him speak, my lord, upon his peril, that i have reserved to myself nothing. speak the truth, seleucus.", "madam, i had rather seal my lips than to my peril speak that which is not.", "what have i kept back?", "enough to purchase what you have made known.", "nay, blush not, cleopatra. i approve your wisdom in the deed.", "see, caesar! oh, behold how pomp is followed! mine will now be yours, and, should we shift estates, yours would be mine. the ingratitude of this seleucus does even make me wild. o slave, of no more trust than love that's hired! what, goest thou back? thou shalt go back, i warrant thee! but i'll catch thine eyes, though they had wings. slave, soulless villain, dog! oh, rarely base!"], ["good queen, let us entreat you", "o caesar, what a wounding shame is this, that thou, vouchsafing here to visit me, doing the honor of thy lordliness to one so meek, that mine own servant should parcel the sum of my disgraces by addition of his envy! say, good caesar, that i some lady trifles have reserved, immoment toys, things of such dignity as we greet modern friends withal, and say some nobler token i have kept apart for livia and octavia, to induce their mediation, must i be unfolded with one that i have bred? the gods! it smites me beneath the fall i have. prithee, go hence, or i shall show the cinders of my spirit through th' ashes of my chance. wert thou a man, thou wouldst have mercy on me.", "forbear, seleucus.", "be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought for things that others do, and when we fall we answer others' merits in our name, are therefore to be pitied."], ["cleopatra, not what you have reserved nor what acknowledged put we i' th' roll of conquest. still be 't yours. bestow it at your pleasure, and believe caesar's no merchant, to make prize with you of things that merchants sold. therefore be cheered. make not your thoughts your prison. no, dear queen, for we intend so to dispose you as yourself shall give us counsel. feed and sleep. our care and pity is so much upon you that we remain your friend. and so, adieu.", "my master, and my lord!", "not so. adieu.", "he words me, girls, he words me, that i should not be noble to myself. but, hark thee, charmian.", "finish, good lady. the bright day is done, and we are for the dark.", "hie thee again. i have spoke already, and it is provided. go put it to the haste.", "madam, i will."], ["where's the queen?", "behold, sir.", "dolabella!", "madam, as thereto sworn by your command, which my love makes religion to obey, i tell you this: caesar through syria intends his journey, and within three days you with your children will he send before. make your best use of this. i have performed your pleasure and my promise.", "dolabella, i shall remain your debtor.", "i your servant. adieu, good queen. i must attend on caesar.", "farewell, and thanks.", "now, iras, what think'st thou? thou an egyptian puppet shalt be shown in rome, as well as i. mechanic slaves with greasy aprons, rules, and hammers shall uplift us to the view. in their thick breaths, rank of gross diet, shall be enclouded, and forced to drink their vapor."], ["the gods forbid!", "nay, 'tis most certain, iras. saucy lictors will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers ballad us out o' tune. the quick comedians extemporally will stage us and present our alexandrian revels. antony shall be brought drunken forth, and i shall see some squeaking cleopatra boy my greatness i' th' posture of a whore.", "oh, the good gods!", "nay, that's certain.", "i'll never see 't! for i am sure mine nails are stronger than mine eyes.", "why, that's the way to fool their preparation and to conquer their most absurd intents.", "now, charmian! show me, my women, like a queen. go fetch my best attires. i am again for cydnus, to meet mark antony. sirrah iras, go. now, noble charmian, we'll dispatch indeed, and when thou hast done this chare i'll give thee leave to play till doomsday. bring our crown and all."], ["wherefore's this noise?", "here is a rural fellow that will not be denied your highness' presence. he brings you figs.", "let him come in.", "what poor an instrument may do a noble deed! he brings me liberty. my resolution's placed, and i have nothing of woman in me. now from head to foot i am marble-constant. now the fleeting moon no planet is of mine.", "this is the man.", "avoid, and leave him.", "hast thou the pretty worm of nilus there, that kills and pains not?", "truly, i have him, but i would not be the party that should desire you to touch him, for his biting is immortal. those that do die of it do seldom or never recover."], ["remember'st thou any that have died on 't?", "very many, men and women too. i heard of one of them no longer than yesterday a very honest woman, but something given to lie, as a woman should not do but in the way of honesty how she died of the biting of it, what pain she felt. truly, she makes a very good report o' th' worm. but he that will believe all that they say shall never be saved by half that they do. but this is most falliable, the worm's an odd worm.", "get thee hence, farewell.", "i wish you all joy of the worm.", "farewell.", "you must think this, look you, that the worm will do his kind.", "ay, ay. farewell.", "look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping of wise people, for indeed there is no goodness in the worm.", "take thou no care. it shall be heeded.", "very good. give it nothing, i pray you, for it is not worth the feeding.", "will it eat me?", "you must not think i am so simple but i know the devil himself will not eat a woman. i know that a woman is a dish for the gods, if the devil dress her not. but, truly, these same whoreson devils do the gods great harm in their women, for in every ten that they make, the devils mar five."], ["well, get thee gone. farewell.", "yes, forsooth. i wish you joy o' th' worm.", "give me my robe. put on my crown. i have immortal longings in me. now no more the juice of egypt's grape shall moist this lip.", "yare, yare, good iras, quick. methinks i hear antony call. i see him rouse himself to praise my noble act. i hear him mock the luck of caesar, which the gods give men to excuse their after wrath. husband, i come! now to that name my courage prove my title! i am fire and air, my other elements i give to baser life. so, have you done? come then and take the last warmth of my lips. farewell, kind charmian. iras, long farewell.", "have i the aspic in my lips? dost fall? if thou and nature can so gently part, the stroke of death is as a lover's pinch, which hurts, and is desired. dost thou lie still? if thus thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world it is not worth leave-taking."], ["dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that i may say the gods themselves do weep!", "this proves me base. if she first meet the curld antony, he'll make demand of her and spend that kiss which is my heaven to have. come, thou mortal wretch,", "with thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate of life at once untie. poor venomous fool be angry and dispatch. oh, couldst thou speak, that i might hear thee call great caesar ass unpolicied!", "o eastern star!", "peace, peace! dost thou not see my baby at my breast, that sucks the nurse asleep?", "oh, break! oh, break!", "as sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle o antony! nay, i will take thee too.", "what should i stay", "in this wild world? so, fare thee well. now boast thee, death, in thy possession lies a lass unparalleled. downy windows, close,"], ["and golden phoebus never be beheld of eyes again so royal! your crown's awry. i'll mend it and then play", "where's the queen?", "speak softly. wake her not.", "caesar hath sent", "too slow a messenger.", "oh, come apace, dispatch! i partly feel thee.", "approach, ho! all's not well. caesar's beguiled.", "there's dolabella sent from caesar. call him.", "what work is here, charmian? is this well done?", "it is well done and fitting for a princess descended of so many royal kings. ah, soldier!", "how goes it here?", "all dead.", "caesar, thy thoughts touch their effects in this. thyself art coming to see performed the dreaded act which thou so sought'st to hinder."], ["a way there, a way for caesar!", "o sir, you are too sure an augurer. that you did fear is done.", "bravest at the last, she leveled at our purposes and, being royal, took her own way. the manner of their deaths? i do not see them bleed.", "who was last with them?", "a simple countryman that brought her figs. this was his basket.", "poisoned, then.", "oh, caesar, this charmian lived but now. she stood and spake. i found her trimming up the diadem on her dead mistress. tremblingly she stood and on the sudden dropped.", "oh, noble weakness! if they had swallowed poison, 'twould appear by external swelling, but she looks like sleep, as she would catch another antony in her strong toil of grace.", "here on her breast there is a vent of blood, and something blown. the like is on her arm."], ["this is an aspic's trail, and these fig leaves have slime upon them, such as th' aspic leaves upon the caves of nile.", "most probable that so she died, for her physician tells me she hath pursued conclusions infinite of easy ways to die. take up her bed and bear her women from the monument. she shall be buried by her antony. no grave upon the earth shall clip in it a pair so famous. high events as these strike those that make them, and their story is no less in pity than his glory which brought them to be lamented. our army shall in solemn show attend this funeral, and then to rome. come, dolabella, see high order in this great solemnity."]], [["as i remember, adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns, and, as thou sayest, charged my brother on his blessing to breed me well. and there begins my sadness. my brother jaques he keeps at school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit. for my part, he keeps me rustically at home or, to speak more properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you that \"keeping\" for a gentleman of my birth that differs not from the stalling of an ox? his horses are bred better, for, besides that they are fair with their feeding, they are taught their manage and, to that end, riders dearly hired. but i, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth, for the which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as i. besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave me his countenance seems to take from me. he lets me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my education. this is it, adam, that grieves me, and the spirit of my father, which i think is within me, begins to mutiny against this servitude. i will no longer endure it, though yet i know no wise remedy how to avoid it.", "yonder comes my master, your brother.", "go apart, adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up."], ["now, sir, what make you here?", "nothing. i am not taught to make anything.", "what mar you then, sir?", "marry, sir, i am helping you to mar that which god made, a poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.", "marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.", "shall i keep your hogs and eat husks with them? what prodigal portion have i spent that i should come to such penury?", "know you where you are, sir?", "o sir, very well: here in your orchard.", "know you before whom, sir?", "ay, better than him i am before knows me. i know you are my eldest brother, and in the gentle condition of blood you should so know me. the courtesy of nations allows you my better, in that you are the first-born, but the same tradition takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt us. i have as much of my father in me as you, albeit, i confess, your coming before me is nearer to his reverence."], ["what, boy!", "come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.", "wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?", "i am no villain. i am the youngest son of sir rowland de boys. he was my father, and he is thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains. wert thou not my brother, i would not take this hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so. thou hast railed on thyself.", "sweet masters, be patient. for your father's remembrance, be at accord.", "let me go, i say.", "i will not till i please. you shall hear me. my father charged you in his will to give me good education. you have trained me like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike qualities. the spirit of my father grows strong in me, and i will no longer endure it. therefore allow me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me the poor allottery my father left me by testament. with that i will go buy my fortunes.", "and what wilt thou do beg when that is spent? well, sir, get you in. i will not long be troubled with you. you shall have some part of your will. i pray you leave me."], ["i will no further offend you than becomes me for my good.", "get you with him, you old dog.", "is \"old dog\" my reward? most true, i have lost my teeth in your service. god be with my old master. he would not have spoke such a word.", "is it even so? begin you to grow upon me? i will physic your rankness and yet give no thousand crowns neither. holla, dennis!", "calls your worship?", "was not charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?", "so please you, he is here at the door and importunes access to you.", "call him in.", "'twill be a good way, and tomorrow the wrestling is."], ["good morrow to your worship.", "good monsieur charles, what's the new news at the new court?", "there's no news at the court, sir, but the old news. that is, the old duke is banished by his younger brother the new duke, and three or four loving lords have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke. therefore he gives them good leave to wander.", "can you tell if rosalind, the duke's daughter, be banished with her father?", "oh, no, for the duke's daughter her cousin so loves her, being ever from their cradles bred together, that she would have followed her exile or have died to stay behind her. she is at the court, and no less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter, and never two ladies loved as they do.", "where will the old duke live?", "they say he is already in the forest of arden, and a many merry men with him; and there they live like the old robin hood of england. they say many young gentlemen flock to him every day and fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden world.", "what, you wrestle tomorrow before the new duke?"], ["marry, do i, sir, and i came to acquaint you with a matter. i am given, sir, secretly to understand that your younger brother orlando hath a disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall. tomorrow, sir, i wrestle for my credit, and he that escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him well. your brother is but young and tender, and, for your love i would be loath to foil him, as i must for my own honor if he come in. therefore, out of my love to you, i came hither to acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him from his intendment or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into, in that it is a thing of his own search and altogether against my will.", "charles, i thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt find i will most kindly requite. i had myself notice of my brother's purpose herein and have by underhand means labored to dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. i'll tell thee, charles: it is the stubbornest young fellow of france, full of ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good parts, a secret and villainous contriver against me his natural brother. therefore use thy discretion. i had as lief thou didst break his neck as his finger. and thou wert best look to 't, for if thou dost him any slight disgrace or if he do not mightily grace himself on thee, he will practice against thee by poison, entrap thee by some treacherous device and never leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other. for i assure thee and almost with tears i speak it there is not one so young and so villainous this day living. i speak but brotherly of him, but should i anatomize him to thee as he is, i must blush and weep, and thou must look pale and wonder."], ["i am heartily glad i came hither to you. if he come tomorrow, i'll give him his payment. if ever he go alone again, i'll never wrestle for prize more. and so god keep your worship.", "farewell, good charles.", "now will i stir this gamester. i hope i shall see an end of him, for my soul yet i know not why hates nothing more than he. yet he's gentle, never schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in the heart of the world and especially of my own people, who best know him, that i am altogether misprized. but it shall not be so long; this wrestler shall clear all. nothing remains but that i kindle the boy thither, which now i'll go about."], ["i pray thee, rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.", "dear celia, i show more mirth than i am mistress of, and would you yet i were merrier? unless you could teach me to forget a banished father, you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.", "herein i see thou lov'st me not with the full weight that i love thee. if my uncle, thy banished father, had banished thy uncle, the duke my father, so thou hadst been still with me, i could have taught my love to take thy father for mine. so wouldst thou, if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously tempered as mine is to thee.", "well, i will forget the condition of my estate to rejoice in yours.", "you know my father hath no child but i, nor none is like to have, and, truly, when he dies, thou shalt be his heir, for what he hath taken away from thy father perforce, i will render thee again in affection. by mine honor i will, and when i break that oath, let me turn monster. therefore, my sweet rose, my dear rose, be merry.", "from henceforth i will, coz, and devise sports. let me see what think you of falling in love?", "marry, i prithee do, to make sport withal, but love no man in good earnest, nor no further in sport neither than with safety of a pure blush thou mayst in honor come off again."], ["what shall be our sport, then?", "let us sit and mock the good housewife fortune from her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.", "i would we could do so, for her benefits are mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her gifts to women.", "'tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce makes honest, and those that she makes honest she makes very ill- favoredly.", "nay, now thou goest from fortune's office to nature's. fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of nature.", "no? when nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by fortune fall into the fire? though nature hath given us wit to flout at fortune, hath not fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?", "indeed, there is fortune too hard for nature, when fortune makes nature's natural the cutter-off of nature's wit.", "peradventure this is not fortune's work neither, but nature's, who perceiveth our natural wits too dull to reason of such goddesses, and hath sent this natural for our whetstone, for always the dullness of the fool is the whetstone of the wits. how now, wit, whither wander you?"], ["mistress, you must come away to your father.", "were you made the messenger?", "no, by mine honor, but i was bid to come for you.", "where learned you that oath, fool?", "of a certain knight that swore by his honor they were good pancakes, and swore by his honor the mustard was naught. now, i'll stand to it, the pancakes were naught and the mustard was good, and yet was not the knight forsworn.", "how prove you that in the great heap of your knowledge?", "ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.", "stand you both forth now: stroke your chins and swear by your beards that i am a knave.", "by our beards (if we had them), thou art.", "by my knavery (if i had it), then i were. but if you swear by that that is not, you are not forsworn. no more was this knight swearing by his honor, for he never had any; or if he had, he had sworn it away before ever he saw those pancakes or that mustard."], ["prithee, who is 't that thou mean'st?", "one that old frederick, your father, loves.", "my father's love is enough to honor him. enough. speak no more of him; you'll be whipped for taxation one of these days.", "the more pity that fools may not speak wisely what wise men do foolishly.", "by my troth, thou sayest true. for, since the little wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have makes a great show. here comes monsieur le beau.", "with his mouth full of news.", "which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young.", "then shall we be news-crammed.", "all the better. we shall be the more marketable. bonjour, monsieur le beau. what's the news?", "fair princess, you have lost much good sport.", "sport? of what color?"], ["what color, madam? how shall i answer you?", "as wit and fortune will.", "or as the destinies decrees.", "well said. that was laid on with a trowel.", "nay, if i keep not my rank", "thou losest thy old smell.", "you amaze me, ladies. i would have told you of good wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.", "you tell us the manner of the wrestling.", "i will tell you the beginning, and if it please your ladyships, you may see the end, for the best is yet to do, and here, where you are, they are coming to perform it.", "well, the beginning that is dead and buried.", "there comes an old man and his three sons", "i could match this beginning with an old tale.", "three proper young men of excellent growth and presence."], ["with bills on their necks: \"be it known unto all men by these presents.\"", "the eldest of the three wrestled with charles, the duke's wrestler, which charles in a moment threw him and broke three of his ribs, that there is little hope of life in him. so he served the second, and so the third. yonder they lie, the poor old man their father making such pitiful dole over them that all the beholders take his part with weeping.", "alas!", "but what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies have lost?", "why, this that i speak of.", "thus men may grow wiser every day. it is the first time that ever i heard breaking of ribs was sport for ladies.", "or i, i promise thee.", "but is there any else longs to see this broken music in his sides? is there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking? shall we see this wrestling, cousin?"], ["you must if you stay here, for here is the place appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to perform it.", "yonder sure they are coming. let us now stay and see it.", "come on. since the youth will not be entreated, his own peril on his forwardness.", "is yonder the man?", "even he, madam.", "alas, he is too young. yet he looks successfully.", "how now, daughter and cousin? are you crept hither to see the wrestling?", "ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.", "you will take little delight in it, i can tell you, there is such odds in the man. in pity of the challenger's youth, i would fain dissuade him, but he will not be entreated. speak to him, ladies; see if you can move him.", "call him hither, good monsieur le beau.", "do so. i'll not be by."], ["monsieur the challenger, the princess calls for you.", "i attend them with all respect and duty.", "young man, have you challenged charles the wrestler?", "no, fair princess. he is the general challenger. i come but in as others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.", "young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years. you have seen cruel proof of this man's strength. if you saw yourself with your eyes or knew yourself with your judgment, the fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal enterprise. we pray you for your own sake to embrace your own safety and give over this attempt.", "do, young sir. your reputation shall not therefore be misprized. we will make it our suit to the duke that the wrestling might not go forward.", "i beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts, wherein i confess me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent ladies anything. but let your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial, wherein, if i be foiled, there is but one shamed that was never gracious; if killed, but one dead that was willing to be so. i shall do my friends no wrong, for i have none to lament me; the world no injury, for in it i have nothing. only in the world i fill up a place which may be better supplied when i have made it empty.", "the little strength that i have, i would it were with you.", "and mine, to eke out hers."], ["fare you well. pray heaven i be deceived in you.", "your heart's desires be with you.", "come, where is this young gallant that is so desirous to lie with his mother earth?", "ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.", "you shall try but one fall.", "no, i warrant your grace you shall not entreat him to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him from a first.", "you mean to mock me after, you should not have mocked me before. but come your ways.", "now hercules be thy speed, young man!", "i would i were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the leg.", "o excellent young man!"], ["if i had a thunderbolt in mine eye, i can tell who should down.", "no more, no more.", "yes, i beseech your grace. i am not yet well breathed.", "how dost thou, charles?", "he cannot speak, my lord.", "bear him away. what is thy name, young man?", "orlando, my liege, the youngest son of sir rowland de boys.", "i would thou hadst been son to some man else. the world esteemed thy father honorable, but i did find him still mine enemy. thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed hadst thou descended from another house. but fare thee well. thou art a gallant youth. i would thou hadst told me of another father.", "were i my father, coz, would i do this?", "i am more proud to be sir rowland's son, his youngest son, and would not change that calling to be adopted heir to frederick."], ["my father loved sir rowland as his soul, and all the world was of my father's mind. had i before known this young man his son, i should have given him tears unto entreaties ere he should thus have ventured.", "gentle cousin, let us go thank him and encourage him. my father's rough and envious disposition sticks me at heart. sir, you have well deserved. if you do keep your promises in love but justly, as you have exceeded all promise, your mistress shall be happy.", "gentleman, wear this for me one out of suits with fortune that could give more but that her hand lacks means. shall we go, coz?", "ay. fare you well, fair gentleman.", "can i not say \"i thank you\"? my better parts are all thrown down, and that which here stands up is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.", "he calls us back. my pride fell with my fortunes. i'll ask him what he would. did you call, sir? sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown more than your enemies.", "will you go, coz?", "have with you. fare you well."], ["what passion hangs these weights upon my tongue? i cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference. o poor orlando! thou art overthrown. or charles or something weaker masters thee.", "good sir, i do in friendship counsel you to leave this place. albeit you have deserved high commendation, true applause, and love, yet such is now the duke's condition that he misconsters all that you have done. the duke is humorous. what he is indeed more suits you to conceive than i to speak of.", "i thank you, sir, and pray you tell me this: which of the two was daughter of the duke that here was at the wrestling?", "neither his daughter, if we judge by manners, but yet indeed the smaller is his daughter the other is daughter to the banished duke, and here detained by her usurping uncle to keep his daughter company, whose loves are dearer than the natural bond of sisters. but i can tell you that of late this duke hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece, grounded upon no other argument but that the people praise her for her virtues and pity her for her good father's sake; and, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady will suddenly break forth. sir, fare you well. hereafter, in a better world than this, i shall desire more love and knowledge of you."], ["i rest much bounden to you. fare you well.", "thus must i from the smoke into the smother, from tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother. but heavenly rosalind!"], ["why, cousin! why, rosalind! cupid have mercy, not a word?", "not one to throw at a dog.", "no, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs. throw some of them at me. come, lame me with reasons.", "then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should be lamed with reasons and the other mad without any.", "but is all this for your father?", "no, some of it is for my child's father. oh, how full of briers is this working-day world!", "they are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday foolery. if we walk not in the trodden paths our very petticoats will catch them.", "i could shake them off my coat. these burs are in my heart.", "hem them away.", "i would try, if i could cry \"hem\" and have him.", "come, come, wrestle with thy affections."], ["oh, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself.", "oh, a good wish upon you. you will try in time, in despite of a fall. but turning these jests out of service, let us talk in good earnest. is it possible on such a sudden you should fall into so strong a liking with old sir rowland's youngest son?", "the duke my father loved his father dearly.", "doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly? by this kind of chase i should hate him, for my father hated his father dearly. yet i hate not orlando.", "no, faith, hate him not, for my sake.", "why should i not? doth he not deserve well?", "let me love him for that, and do you love him because i do. look, here comes the duke.", "with his eyes full of anger.", "mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste, and get you from our court.", "me, uncle?", "you, cousin. within these ten days if that thou beest found so near our public court as twenty miles, thou diest for it."], ["i do beseech your grace, let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me. if with myself i hold intelligence or have acquaintance with mine own desires, if that i do not dream or be not frantic as i do trust i am not then, dear uncle, never so much as in a thought unborn did i offend your highness.", "thus do all traitors. if their purgation did consist in words, they are as innocent as grace itself. let it suffice thee that i trust thee not.", "yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor. tell me whereon the likelihood depends.", "thou art thy father's daughter. there's enough.", "so was i when your highness took his dukedom. so was i when your highness banished him. treason is not inherited, my lord, or if we did derive it from our friends, what's that to me? my father was no traitor. then, good my liege, mistake me not so much to think my poverty is treacherous.", "dear sovereign, hear me speak.", "ay, celia, we stayed her for your sake. else had she with her father ranged along."], ["i did not then entreat to have her stay. it was your pleasure and your own remorse. i was too young that time to value her, but now i know her. if she be a traitor, why so am i. we still have slept together, rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together, and, wheresoe'er we went, like juno's swans still we went coupled and inseparable.", "she is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness, her very silence and her patience speak to the people, and they pity her. thou art a fool. she robs thee of thy name, and thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous when she is gone. then open not thy lips. firm and irrevocable is my doom which i have passed upon her. she is banished.", "pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege. i cannot live out of her company.", "you are a fool. you, niece, provide yourself. if you outstay the time, upon mine honor and in the greatness of my word, you die.", "o my poor rosalind, whither wilt thou go? wilt thou change fathers? i will give thee mine. i charge thee, be not thou more grieved than i am.", "i have more cause."], ["thou hast not, cousin. prithee, be cheerful. know'st thou not the duke hath banished me, his daughter?", "that he hath not.", "no, hath not? rosalind lacks then the love which teacheth thee that thou and i am one. shall we be sundered? shall we part, sweet girl? no, let my father seek another heir. therefore devise with me how we may fly, whither to go, and what to bear with us, and do not seek to take your change upon you, to bear your griefs yourself and leave me out. for, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale, say what thou canst, i'll go along with thee.", "why, whither shall we go?", "to seek my uncle in the forest of arden.", "alas, what danger will it be to us, maids as we are, to travel forth so far? beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.", "i'll put myself in poor and mean attire and with a kind of umber smirch my face. the like do you. so shall we pass along and never stir assailants.", "were it not better, because that i am more than common tall, that i did suit me all points like a man? a gallant curtal-axe upon my thigh, a boar-spear in my hand, and in my heart lie there what hidden woman's fear there will, we'll have a swashing and a martial outside as many other mannish cowards have that do outface it with their semblances."], ["what shall i call thee when thou art a man?", "i'll have no worse a name than jove's own page, and therefore look you call me ganymede. but what will you be called?", "something that hath a reference to my state: no longer celia, but aliena.", "but, cousin, what if we assayed to steal the clownish fool out of your father's court? would he not be a comfort to our travel?", "he'll go along o'er the wide world with me. leave me alone to woo him. let's away and get our jewels and our wealth together, devise the fittest time and safest way to hide us from pursuit that will be made after my flight. now go we in content to liberty, and not to banishment."], ["now, my co-mates and brothers in exile, hath not old custom made this life more sweet than that of painted pomp? are not these woods more free from peril than the envious court? here feel we not the penalty of adam, the seasons' difference, as the icy fang and churlish chiding of the winter's wind, which, when it bites and blows upon my body, even till i shrink with cold, i smile and say, \"this is no flattery. these are counselors that feelingly persuade me what i am.\" sweet are the uses of adversity, which, like the toad, ugly and venomous, wears yet a precious jewel in his head. and this our life, exempt from public haunt, finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, sermons in stones, and good in everything.", "i would not change it. happy is your grace, that can translate the stubbornness of fortune into so quiet and so sweet a style.", "come, shall we go and kill us venison? and yet it irks me the poor dappled fools, being native burghers of this desert city, should in their own confines with forkd heads have their round haunches gored."], ["indeed, my lord, the melancholy jaques grieves at that, and in that kind swears you do more usurp than doth your brother that hath banished you. today my lord of amiens and myself did steal behind him as he lay along under an oak, whose antique root peeps out upon the brook that brawls along this wood, to the which place a poor sequestered stag that from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt did come to languish. and indeed, my lord, the wretched animal heaved forth such groans that their discharge did stretch his leathern coat almost to bursting, and the big round tears coursed one another down his innocent nose in piteous chase. and thus the hairy fool, much markd of the melancholy jaques, stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook, augmenting it with tears.", "but what said jaques? did he not moralize this spectacle?", "oh, yes, into a thousand similes. first, for his weeping into the needless stream: \"poor deer,\" quoth he, \"thou mak'st a testament as worldlings do, giving thy sum of more to that which had too much.\" then, being there alone, left and abandoned of his velvet friend, \"'tis right,\" quoth he. \"thus misery doth part the flux of company.\" anon a careless herd, full of the pasture, jumps along by him and never stays to greet him. \"ay,\" quoth jaques, \"sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens. 'tis just the fashion. wherefore do you look upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?\" thus most invectively he pierceth through the body of the country, city, court, yea, and of this our life, swearing that we are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what's worse, to fright the animals and to kill them up in their assigned and native dwelling place."], ["and did you leave him in this contemplation?", "we did, my lord, weeping and commenting upon the sobbing deer.", "show me the place. i love to cope him in these sullen fits, for then he's full of matter.", "i'll bring you to him straight."], ["can it be possible that no man saw them? it cannot be. some villains of my court are of consent and sufferance in this.", "i cannot hear of any that did see her. the ladies, her attendants of her chamber saw her abed, and in the morning early they found the bed untreasured of their mistress.", "my lord, the roinish clown, at whom so oft your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing. hisperia, the princess' gentlewoman, confesses that she secretly o'erheard your daughter and her cousin much commend the parts and graces of the wrestler that did but lately foil the sinewy charles, and she believes wherever they are gone that youth is surely in their company.", "send to his brother. fetch that gallant hither. if he be absent, bring his brother to me. i'll make him find him. do this suddenly, and let not search and inquisition quail to bring again these foolish runaways."], ["who's there?", "what, my young master, o my gentle master, o my sweet master, o you memory of old sir rowland! why, what make you here? why are you virtuous? why do people love you? and wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant? why would you be so fond to overcome the bonny prizer of the humorous duke? your praise is come too swiftly home before you. know you not, master, to some kind of men their graces serve them but as enemies? no more do yours. your virtues, gentle master, are sanctified and holy traitors to you. oh, what a world is this when what is comely envenoms him that bears it!", "why, what's the matter?", "o unhappy youth, come not within these doors. within this roof the enemy of all your graces lives. your brother no, no brother yet the son yet not the son, i will not call him son of him i was about to call his father hath heard your praises, and this night he means to burn the lodging where you use to lie, and you within it. if he fail of that, he will have other means to cut you off. i overheard him and his practices. this is no place, this house is but a butchery. abhor it, fear it, do not enter it."], ["why, whither, adam, wouldst thou have me go?", "no matter whither, so you come not here.", "what, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food, or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce a thievish living on the common road? this i must do, or know not what to do. yet this i will not do, do how i can. i rather will subject me to the malice of a diverted blood and bloody brother.", "but do not so. i have five hundred crowns, the thrifty hire i saved under your father, which i did store to be my foster nurse when service should in my old limbs lie lame and unregarded age in corners thrown. take that, and he that doth the ravens feed, yea, providently caters for the sparrow, be comfort to my age. here is the gold. all this i give you. let me be your servant. though i look old, yet i am strong and lusty, for in my youth i never did apply hot and rebellious liquors in my blood nor did not with unbashful forehead woo the means of weakness and debility. therefore my age is as a lusty winter, frosty but kindly. let me go with you. i'll do the service of a younger man in all your business and necessities."], ["o good old man, how well in thee appears the constant service of the antique world, when service sweat for duty, not for meed. thou art not for the fashion of these times, where none will sweat but for promotion, and having that do choke their service up even with the having. it is not so with thee. but, poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree that cannot so much as a blossom yield in lieu of all thy pains and husbandry. but come thy ways. we'll go along together, and ere we have thy youthful wages spent, we'll light upon some settled low content.", "master, go on, and i will follow thee to the last gasp, with truth and loyalty. from seventeen years till now almost fourscore here livd i, but now live here no more. at seventeen years, many their fortunes seek, but at fourscore, it is too late a week. yet fortune cannot recompense me better than to die well, and not my master's debtor."], ["o jupiter, how weary are my spirits!", "i care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.", "i could find in my heart to disgrace my man's apparel and to cry like a woman, but i must comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat. therefore courage, good aliena.", "i pray you bear with me. i cannot go no further.", "for my part, i had rather bear with you than bear you. yet i should bear no cross if i did bear you, for i think you have no money in your purse.", "well, this is the forest of arden.", "ay, now am i in arden, the more fool i. when i was at home i was in a better place, but travelers must be content.", "ay, be so, good touchstone.", "look you who comes here, a young man and an old in solemn talk."], ["that is the way to make her scorn you still.", "o corin, that thou knew'st how i do love her!", "i partly guess, for i have loved ere now.", "no, corin, being old, thou canst not guess, though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover as ever sighed upon a midnight pillow. but if thy love were ever like to mine as sure i think did never man love so how many actions most ridiculous hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?", "into a thousand that i have forgotten.", "oh, thou didst then ne'er love so heartily. if thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly that ever love did make thee run into, thou hast not loved. or if thou hast not sat as i do now, wearying thy hearer in thy mistress's praise, thou hast not loved. or if thou hast not broke from company abruptly, as my passion now makes me, thou hast not loved. o phoebe, phoebe, phoebe!", "alas, poor shepherd, searching of thy wound, i have by hard adventure found mine own."], ["and i mine. i remember when i was in love i broke my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for coming a- night to jane smile. and i remember the kissing of her batler, and the cow's dugs that her pretty chopped hands had milked. and i remember the wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom i took two cods and, giving her them again, said with weeping tears, \"wear these for my sake.\" we that are true lovers run into strange capers. but as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.", "thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of.", "nay, i shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till i break my shins against it.", "jove, jove, this shepherd's passion is much upon my fashion.", "and mine, but it grows something stale with me.", "i pray you, one of you question yond man, if he for gold will give us any food. i faint almost to death.", "corin) holla, you clown!", "peace, fool. he's not thy kinsman.", "who calls?", "your betters, sir.", "else are they very wretched."], ["peace, i say. good even to you, friend.", "and to you, gentle sir, and to you all.", "i prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold can in this desert place buy entertainment, bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed. here's a young maid with travel much oppressed, and faints for succor.", "fair sir, i pity her and wish, for her sake more than for mine own, my fortunes were more able to relieve her. but i am shepherd to another man and do not shear the fleeces that i graze. my master is of churlish disposition and little recks to find the way to heaven by doing deeds of hospitality. besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now, by reason of his absence, there is nothing that you will feed on. but what is, come see, and in my voice most welcome shall you be.", "what is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?", "that young swain that you saw here but erewhile, that little cares for buying anything.", "i pray thee, if it stand with honesty, buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock, and thou shalt have to pay for it of us."], ["and we will mend thy wages. i like this place, and willingly could waste my time in it.", "assuredly the thing is to be sold. go with me. if you like upon report the soil, the profit, and this kind of life, i will your very faithful feeder be and buy it with your gold right suddenly."], ["", "more, more, i prithee, more.", "it will make you melancholy, monsieur jaques.", "i thank it. more, i prithee, more. i can suck melancholy out of a song as a weasel sucks eggs. more, i prithee, more.", "my voice is ragged. i know i cannot please you.", "i do not desire you to please me. i do desire you to sing. come, more, another stanzo. call you 'em \"stanzos\"?", "what you will, monsieur jaques.", "nay, i care not for their names. they owe me nothing. will you sing?"], ["more at your request than to please myself.", "well then, if ever i thank any man, i'll thank you. but that they call \"compliment\" is like th' encounter of two dog- apes. and when a man thanks me heartily, methinks i have given him a penny and he renders me the beggarly thanks. come, sing. and you that will not, hold your tongues.", "well, i'll end the song. sirs, cover the while; the duke will drink under this tree. he hath been all this day to look you.", "and i have been all this day to avoid him. he is too disputable for my company. i think of as many matters as he, but i give heaven thanks and make no boast of them. come, warble, come.", "", "i'll give you a verse to this note that i made yesterday in despite of my invention."], ["and i'll sing it. jaques thus it goes:", "what's that \"ducdame\"?", "'tis a greek invocation, to call fools into a circle. i'll go sleep if i can. if i cannot, i'll rail against all the first-born of egypt.", "and i'll go seek the duke. his banquet is prepared."], ["dear master, i can go no further. oh, i die for food. here lie i down and measure out my grave. farewell, kind master.", "why, how now, adam? no greater heart in thee? live a little, comfort a little, cheer thyself a little. if this uncouth forest yield anything savage, i will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee. thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers. for my sake, be comfortable. hold death awhile at the arm's end. i will here be with thee presently, and if i bring thee not something to eat, i will give thee leave to die. but if thou diest before i come, thou art a mocker of my labor. well said. thou look'st cheerly, and i'll be with thee quickly. yet thou liest in the bleak air. come, i will bear thee to some shelter, and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner if there live anything in this desert. cheerly, good adam."], ["i think he be transformed into a beast, for i can nowhere find him like a man.", "my lord, he is but even now gone hence. here was he merry, hearing of a song.", "if he, compact of jars, grow musical, we shall have shortly discord in the spheres. go seek him. tell him i would speak with him.", "he saves my labor by his own approach.", "why, how now, monsieur? what a life is this that your poor friends must woo your company? what, you look merrily.", "a fool, a fool, i met a fool i' th' forest, a motley fool. a miserable world! as i do live by food, i met a fool, who laid him down and basked him in the sun and railed on lady fortune in good terms, in good set terms, and yet a motley fool. \"good morrow, fool,\" quoth i. \"no, sir,\" quoth he, \"call me not fool' till heaven hath sent me fortune.\""], ["and then he drew a dial from his poke and, looking on it with lackluster eye, says very wisely, \"it is ten o'clock. thus we may see,\" quoth he, \"how the world wags. 'tis but an hour ago since it was nine, and after one hour more 'twill be eleven. and so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe, and then from hour to hour we rot and rot, and thereby hangs a tale.\" when i did hear the motley fool thus moral on the time, my lungs began to crow like chanticleer that fools should be so deep-contemplative, and i did laugh sans intermission an hour by his dial. o noble fool! a worthy fool! motley's the only wear.", "what fool is this?", "o worthy fool! one that hath been a courtier and says, \"if ladies be but young and fair, they have the gift to know it.\" and in his brain, which is as dry as the remainder biscuit after a voyage, he hath strange places crammed with observation, the which he vents in mangled forms. oh, that i were a fool! i am ambitious for a motley coat.", "thou shalt have one."], ["it is my only suit, provided that you weed your better judgments of all opinion that grows rank in them that i am wise. i must have liberty withal, as large a charter as the wind, to blow on whom i please, for so fools have. and they that are most galld with my folly, they most must laugh. and why, sir, must they so? the \"why\" is plain as way to parish church: he that a fool doth very wisely hit doth very foolishly, although he smart, not to seem senseless of the bob. if not, the wise man's folly is anatomized even by the squand'ring glances of the fool. invest me in my motley. give me leave to speak my mind, and i will through and through cleanse the foul body of th' infected world, if they will patiently receive my medicine.", "fie on thee! i can tell what thou wouldst do.", "what, for a counter, would i do but good?", "most mischievous foul sin in chiding sin, for thou thyself hast been a libertine, as sensual as the brutish sting itself, and all th' embossd sores and headed evils that thou with license of free foot hast caught wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.", "why, who cries out on pride that can therein tax any private party? doth it not flow as hugely as the sea till that the weary very means do ebb?"], ["what woman in the city do i name, when that i say the city-woman bears the cost of princes on unworthy shoulders? who can come in and say that i mean her, when such a one as she such is her neighbor? or what is he of basest function that says his bravery is not of my cost, thinking that i mean him, but therein suits his folly to the mettle of my speech? there then. how then, what then? let me see wherein my tongue hath wronged him. if it do him right, then he hath wronged himself. if he be free, why then my taxing like a wild goose flies unclaimed of any man. but who comes here?", "forbear, and eat no more.", "why, i have eat none yet.", "nor shalt not till necessity be served.", "of what kind should this cock come of?", "art thou thus boldened, man, by thy distress or else a rude despiser of good manners, that in civility thou seem'st so empty?", "you touched my vein at first. the thorny point of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show of smooth civility, yet am i inland bred and know some nurture. but forbear, i say. he dies that touches any of this fruit till i and my affairs are answerd."], ["an you will not be answered with reason, i must die.", "what would you have? your gentleness shall force more than your force move us to gentleness.", "i almost die for food, and let me have it.", "sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.", "speak you so gently? pardon me, i pray you. i thought that all things had been savage here, and therefore put i on the countenance of stern commandment. but whate'er you are that in this desert inaccessible, under the shade of melancholy boughs, lose and neglect the creeping hours of time, if ever you have looked on better days, if ever been where bells have knolled to church, if ever sat at any good man's feast, if ever from your eyelids wiped a tear and know what 'tis to pity and be pitied, let gentleness my strong enforcement be, in the which hope i blush and hide my sword.", "true is it that we have seen better days and have with holy bell been knolled to church, and sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes of drops that sacred pity hath engendered. and therefore sit you down in gentleness, and take upon command what help we have that to your wanting may be ministered."], ["then but forbear your food a little while whiles, like a doe, i go to find my fawn and give it food. there is an old poor man who after me hath many a weary step limped in pure love. till he be first sufficed, oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger, i will not touch a bit.", "go find him out, and we will nothing waste till you return.", "i thank you; and be blessed for your good comfort.", "thou seest we are not all alone unhappy. this wide and universal theater presents more woeful pageants than the scene wherein we play in.", "all the world's a stage, and all the men and women merely players. they have their exits and their entrances, and one man in his time plays many parts, his acts being seven ages. at first the infant, mewling and puking in the nurse's arms. then the whining schoolboy with his satchel and shining morning face, creeping like snail unwillingly to school. and then the lover, sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad made to his mistress' eyebrow. then a soldier, full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard, jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel,"], ["seeking the bubble reputation even in the cannon's mouth. and then the justice, in fair round belly with good capon lined, with eyes severe and beard of formal cut, full of wise saws and modern instances; and so he plays his part. the sixth age shifts into the lean and slippered pantaloon with spectacles on nose and pouch on side, his youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide for his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice, turning again toward childish treble, pipes and whistles in his sound. last scene of all, that ends this strange eventful history, is second childishness and mere oblivion, sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.", "welcome. set down your venerable burden, and let him feed.", "i thank you most for him.", "so had you need. i scarce can speak to thank you for myself.", "welcome. fall to. i will not trouble you as yet to question you about your fortunes. give us some music, and, good cousin, sing."], ["", "if that you were the good sir rowland's son, as you have whispered faithfully you were, and as mine eye doth his effigies witness most truly limned and living in your face, be truly welcome hither. i am the duke that loved your father. the residue of your fortune go to my cave and tell me. good old man, thou art right welcome as thy master is. support him by the arm. give me your hand, and let me all your fortunes understand."], ["not see him since? sir, sir, that cannot be. but were i not the better part made mercy, i should not seek an absent argument of my revenge, thou present. but look to it: find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is. seek him with candle. bring him, dead or living, within this twelvemonth or turn thou no more to seek a living in our territory. thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine worth seizure, do we seize into our hands till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth of what we think against thee.", "oh, that your highness knew my heart in this: i never loved my brother in my life.", "more villain thou. well, push him out of doors and let my officers of such a nature make an extent upon his house and lands. do this expediently, and turn him going."], ["hang there, my verse, in witness of my love. and thou, thrice-crownd queen of night, survey with thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above, thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway. o rosalind, these trees shall be my books, and in their barks my thoughts i'll character, that every eye which in this forest looks shall see thy virtue witnessed everywhere. run, run, orlando, carve on every tree the fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.", "and how like you this shepherd's life, master touchstone?", "truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good life; but in respect that it is a shepherd's life, it is naught. in respect that it is solitary, i like it very well; but in respect that it is private, it is a very vile life. now in respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me well; but in respect it is not in the court, it is tedious. as it is a spare life, look you, it fits my humor well; but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much against my stomach. hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd?"], ["no more but that i know the more one sickens, the worse at ease he is, and that he that wants money, means, and content is without three good friends; that the property of rain is to wet, and fire to burn; that good pasture makes fat sheep; and that a great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull kindred.", "such a one is a natural philosopher. wast ever in court, shepherd?", "no, truly.", "then thou art damned.", "nay, i hope.", "truly, thou art damned, like an ill-roasted egg, all on one side.", "for not being at court? your reason.", "why, if thou never wast at court, thou never saw'st good manners; if thou never saw'st good manners, then thy manners must be wicked, and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation. thou art in a parlous state, shepherd."], ["not a whit, touchstone. those that are good manners at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the behavior of the country is most mockable at the court. you told me you salute not at the court but you kiss your hands. that courtesy would be uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds.", "instance, briefly. come, instance.", "why, we are still handling our ewes, and their fells, you know, are greasy.", "why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? and is not the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man? shallow, shallow. a better instance, i say. come.", "besides, our hands are hard.", "your lips will feel them the sooner. shallow again. a more sounder instance. come.", "and they are often tarred over with the surgery of our sheep; and would you have us kiss tar? the courtier's hands are perfumed with civet.", "most shallow man. thou worms' meat in respect of a good piece of flesh, indeed. learn of the wise and perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar, the very uncleanly flux of a cat. mend the instance, shepherd.", "you have too courtly a wit for me. i'll rest."], ["wilt thou rest damned? god help thee, shallow man. god make incision in thee; thou art raw.", "sir, i am a true laborer. i earn that i eat, get that i wear, owe no man hate, envy no man's happiness, glad of other men's good, content with my harm, and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze and my lambs suck.", "that is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes and the rams together and to offer to get your living by the copulation of cattle; to be bawd to a bellwether and to betray a she-lamb of a twelvemonth to a crooked-pated old cuckoldly ram, out of all reasonable match. if thou be'st not damned for this, the devil himself will have no shepherds. i cannot see else how thou shouldst 'scape.", "here comes young master ganymede, my new mistress's brother.", "from the east to western ind, no jewel is like rosalind. her worth being mounted on the wind, through all the world bears rosalind. all the pictures fairest lined are but black to rosalind. let no fair be kept in mind but the fair of rosalind."], ["i'll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and suppers and sleeping hours excepted. it is the right butter-women's rank to market.", "out, fool.", "for a taste: if a hart do lack a hind, let him seek out rosalind. if the cat will after kind, so, be sure, will rosalind. winter garments must be lined, so must slender rosalind. they that reap must sheaf and bind, then to cart with rosalind. sweetest nut hath sourest rind; such a nut is rosalind. he that sweetest rose will find must find love's prick, and rosalind. this is the very false gallop of verses. why do you infect yourself with them?", "peace, you dull fool. i found them on a tree.", "truly, the tree yields bad fruit.", "i'll graft it with you, and then i shall graft it with a medlar. then it will be the earliest fruit i' th' country, for you'll be rotten ere you be half ripe, and that's the right virtue of the medlar."], ["you have said, but whether wisely or no, let the forest judge.", "peace. here comes my sister reading. stand aside.", "why should this a desert be? for it is unpeopled? no. tongues i'll hang on every tree that shall civil sayings show. some how brief the life of man runs his erring pilgrimage, that the stretching of a span buckles in his sum of age; some of violated vows 'twixt the souls of friend and friend. but upon the fairest boughs, or at every sentence end, will i \"rosalinda\" write, teaching all that read to know the quintessence of every sprite heaven would in little show. therefore heaven nature charged that one body should be filled with all graces wide-enlarged. nature presently distilled helen's cheek, but not her heart, cleopatra's majesty, atalanta's better part, sad lucretia's modesty."], ["thus rosalind of many parts by heavenly synod was devised, of many faces, eyes, and hearts to have the touches dearest prized. heaven would that she these gifts should have and i to live and die her slave.", "o most gentle jupiter, what tedious homily of love have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never cried, \"have patience, good people.\"", "how now? back, friends. shepherd, go off a little. go with him, sirrah.", "come, shepherd, let us make an honorable retreat, though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.", "didst thou hear these verses?", "oh, yes, i heard them all, and more too, for some of them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.", "that's no matter. the feet might bear the verses.", "ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear themselves without the verse, and therefore stood lamely in the verse."], ["but didst thou hear without wondering how thy name should be hanged and carved upon these trees?", "i was seven of the nine days out of the wonder before you came, for look here what i found on a palm tree. i was never so berhymed since pythagoras' time, that i was an irish rat, which i can hardly remember.", "trow you who hath done this?", "is it a man?", "and a chain, that you once wore, about his neck. change you color?", "i prithee, who?", "o lord, lord, it is a hard matter for friends to meet, but mountains may be removed with earthquakes and so encounter.", "nay, but who is it?", "is it possible?", "nay, i prithee now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.", "o wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful wonderful, and yet again wonderful, and after that, out of all whooping!"], ["good my complexion, dost thou think though i am caparisoned like a man, i have a doublet and hose in my disposition? one inch of delay more is a south sea of discovery. i prithee, tell me who is it quickly, and speak apace. i would thou couldst stammer, that thou might'st pour this concealed man out of thy mouth as wine comes out of a narrow-mouthed bottle either too much at once, or none at all. i prithee take the cork out of thy mouth, that i may drink thy tidings.", "so you may put a man in your belly.", "is he of god's making? what manner of man? is his head worth a hat or his chin worth a beard?", "nay, he hath but a little beard.", "why, god will send more, if the man will be thankful. let me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.", "it is young orlando, that tripped up the wrestler's heels and your heart both in an instant.", "nay, but the devil take mocking. speak sad brow and true maid.", "i' faith, coz, 'tis he.", "orlando?", "orlando."], ["alas the day, what shall i do with my doublet and hose? what did he when thou saw'st him? what said he? how looked he? wherein went he? what makes him here? did he ask for me? where remains he? how parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see him again? answer me in one word.", "you must borrow me gargantua's mouth first. 'tis a word too great for any mouth of this age's size. to say ay and no to these particulars is more than to answer in a catechism.", "but doth he know that i am in this forest and in man's apparel? looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled?", "it is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the propositions of a lover. but take a taste of my finding him, and relish it with good observance. i found him under a tree like a dropped acorn.", "it may well be called jove's tree when it drops forth such fruit.", "give me audience, good madam.", "proceed.", "there lay he, stretched along like a wounded knight.", "though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes the ground."], ["cry \"holla\" to thy tongue, i prithee. it curvets unseasonably. he was furnished like a hunter.", "oh, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.", "i would sing my song without a burden. thou bring'st me out of tune.", "do you not know i am a woman? when i think, i must speak. sweet, say on.", "you bring me out. soft, comes he not here?", "'tis he. slink by, and note him.", "i thank you for your company, but, good faith, i had as lief have been myself alone.", "and so had i, but yet, for fashion sake, i thank you too for your society.", "god be wi' you. let's meet as little as we can.", "i do desire we may be better strangers.", "i pray you mar no more trees with writing love songs in their barks.", "i pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them ill- favoredly."], ["rosalind is your love's name?", "yes, just.", "i do not like her name.", "there was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened.", "what stature is she of?", "just as high as my heart.", "you are full of pretty answers. have you not been acquainted with goldsmiths' wives and conned them out of rings?", "not so. but i answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have studied your questions.", "you have a nimble wit. i think 'twas made of atalanta's heels. will you sit down with me? and we two will rail against our mistress the world and all our misery.", "i will chide no breather in the world but myself, against whom i know most faults.", "the worst fault you have is to be in love.", "'tis a fault i will not change for your best virtue. i am weary of you."], ["by my troth, i was seeking for a fool when i found you.", "he is drowned in the brook. look but in, and you shall see him.", "there i shall see mine own figure.", "which i take to be either a fool or a cipher.", "i'll tarry no longer with you. farewell, good signior love.", "i am glad of your departure. adieu, good monsieur melancholy.", "celia i will speak to him like a saucy lackey, and under that habit play the knave with him. do you hear, forester?", "very well. what would you?", "i pray you, what is 't o'clock?", "you should ask me what time o' day. there's no clock in the forest.", "then there is no true lover in the forest, else sighing every minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of time as well as a clock."], ["and why not the swift foot of time? had not that been as proper?", "by no means, sir. time travels in diverse paces with diverse persons. i'll tell you who time ambles withal, who time trots withal, who time gallops withal, and who he stands still withal.", "i prithee, who doth he trot withal?", "marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the contract of her marriage and the day it is solemnized. if the interim be but a se'nnight, time's pace is so hard that it seems the length of seven year.", "who ambles time withal?", "with a priest that lacks latin and a rich man that hath not the gout, for the one sleeps easily because he cannot study and the other lives merrily because he feels no pain the one lacking the burden of lean and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious penury. these time ambles withal.", "who doth he gallop withal?", "with a thief to the gallows, for though he go as softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.", "who stays it still withal?", "with lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between term and term, and then they perceive not how time moves."], ["where dwell you, pretty youth?", "with this shepherdess, my sister, here in the skirts of the forest like fringe upon a petticoat.", "are you native of this place?", "as the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.", "your accent is something finer than you could purchase in so removed a dwelling.", "i have been told so of many. but indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in love. i have heard him read many lectures against it, and i thank god i am not a woman, to be touched with so many giddy offenses as he hath generally taxed their whole sex withal.", "can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid to the charge of women?", "there were none principal. they were all like one another as half-pence are, every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it.", "i prithee, recount some of them."], ["no, i will not cast away my physic but on those that are sick. there is a man haunts the forest that abuses our young plants with carving \"rosalind\" on their barks, hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies on brambles, all, forsooth, deifying the name of rosalind. if i could meet that fancy- monger i would give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the quotidian of love upon him.", "i am he that is so love-shaked. i pray you tell me your remedy.", "there is none of my uncle's marks upon you. he taught me how to know a man in love, in which cage of rushes i am sure you are not prisoner.", "what were his marks?", "a lean cheek, which you have not; a blue eye and sunken, which you have not; an unquestionable spirit, which you have not; a beard neglected, which you have not but i pardon you for that, for simply your having in beard is a younger brother's revenue. then your hose should be ungartered, your bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe untied, and everything about you demonstrating a careless desolation. but you are no such man. you are rather point-device in your accouterments, as loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.", "fair youth, i would i could make thee believe i love."], ["me believe it? you may as soon make her that you love believe it, which i warrant she is apter to do than to confess she does. that is one of the points in the which women still give the lie to their consciences. but, in good sooth, are you he that hangs the verses on the trees wherein rosalind is so admired?", "i swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of rosalind, i am that he, that unfortunate he.", "but are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?", "neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.", "love is merely a madness and, i tell you, deserves as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do, and the reason why they are not so punished and cured is that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers are in love, too. yet i profess curing it by counsel.", "did you ever cure any so?"], ["yes, one, and in this manner. he was to imagine me his love, his mistress, and i set him every day to woo me; at which time would i, being but a moonish youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles; for every passion something, and for no passion truly anything, as boys and women are, for the most part, cattle of this color; would now like him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then forswear him; now weep for him, then spit at him, that i drave my suitor from his mad humor of love to a living humor of madness, which was to forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a nook merely monastic. and thus i cured him, and this way will i take upon me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep's heart, that there shall not be one spot of love in 't.", "i would not be cured, youth.", "i would cure you if you would but call me rosalind and come every day to my cote and woo me.", "now, by the faith of my love, i will. tell me where it is.", "go with me to it, and i'll show it you; and by the way you shall tell me where in the forest you live. will you go?", "with all my heart, good youth.", "nay, you must call me rosalind. come, sister, will you go?"], ["come apace, good audrey. i will fetch up your goats, audrey. and how, audrey? am i the man yet? doth my simple feature content you?", "your features, lord warrant us! what features?", "i am here with thee and thy goats, as the most capricious poet, honest ovid, was among the goths.", "o knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than jove in a thatched house.", "when a man's verses cannot be understood nor a man's good wit seconded with the forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room. truly, i would the gods had made thee poetical.", "i do not know what \"poetical\" is. is it honest in deed and word? is it a true thing?", "no, truly, for the truest poetry is the most feigning, and lovers are given to poetry, and what they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.", "do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?", "i do, truly, for thou swear'st to me thou art honest. now, if thou wert a poet, i might have some hope thou didst feign."], ["would you not have me honest?", "no, truly, unless thou wert hard-favored, for honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.", "a material fool.", "well, i am not fair, and therefore i pray the gods make me honest.", "truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were to put good meat into an unclean dish.", "i am not a slut, though i thank the gods i am foul.", "well, praised be the gods for thy foulness; sluttishness may come hereafter. but be it as it may be, i will marry thee; and to that end i have been with sir oliver martext, the vicar of the next village, who hath promised to meet me in this place of the forest and to couple us.", "i would fain see this meeting.", "well, the gods give us joy.", "amen. a man may, if he were of a fearful heart, stagger in this attempt, for here we have no temple but the wood, no assembly but horn-beasts. but what though? courage. as horns are odious, they are necessary. it is said, \"many a man knows no end of his goods.\" right: many a man has good horns and knows no end of them."], ["well, that is the dowry of his wife; 'tis none of his own getting. horns? even so. poor men alone? no, no. the noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal. is the single man therefore blessed? no. as a walled town is more worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a married man more honorable than the bare brow of a bachelor. and by how much defense is better than no skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to want.", "here comes sir oliver. sir oliver martext, you are well met. will you dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go with you to your chapel?", "is there none here to give the woman?", "i will not take her on gift of any man.", "truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.", "proceed, proceed. i'll give her.", "good even, good monsieur what-ye-call't. how do you, sir? you are very well met. god 'ild you for your last company. i am very glad to see you. even a toy in hand here, sir. nay, pray be covered.", "will you be married, motley?"], ["as the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb, and the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires; and as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.", "and will you, being a man of your breeding, be married under a bush like a beggar? get you to church, and have a good priest that can tell you what marriage is. this fellow will but join you together as they join wainscot. then one of you will prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp.", "i am not in the mind but i were better to be married of him than of another, for he is not like to marry me well, and not being well married, it will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.", "go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.", "come, sweet audrey. we must be married, or we must live in bawdry. farewell, good master oliver, not", "'tis no matter. ne'er a fantastical knave of them all shall flout me out of my calling."], ["never talk to me. i will weep.", "do, i prithee, but yet have the grace to consider that tears do not become a man.", "but have i not cause to weep?", "as good cause as one would desire. therefore weep.", "his very hair is of the dissembling color.", "something browner than judas's. marry, his kisses are judas's own children.", "i' faith, his hair is of a good color.", "an excellent color. your chestnut was ever the only color.", "and his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holy bread.", "he hath bought a pair of cast lips of diana. a nun of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously. the very ice of chastity is in them.", "but why did he swear he would come this morning, and comes not?"], ["nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.", "do you think so?", "yes, i think he is not a pick-purse nor a horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, i do think him as concave as a covered goblet or a worm-eaten nut.", "not true in love?", "yes, when he is in, but i think he is not in.", "you have heard him swear downright he was.", "\"was\" is not \"is.\" besides, the oath of a lover is no stronger than the word of a tapster. they are both the confirmer of false reckonings. he attends here in the forest on the duke your father.", "i met the duke yesterday and had much question with him. he asked me of what parentage i was. i told him, of as good as he. so he laughed and let me go. but what talk we of fathers when there is such a man as orlando?", "oh, that's a brave man. he writes brave verses, speaks brave words, swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of his lover, as a puny tilter that spurs his horse but on one side breaks his staff like a noble goose; but all's brave that youth mounts and folly guides."], ["who comes here?", "mistress and master, you have oft inquired after the shepherd that complained of love, who you saw sitting by me on the turf, praising the proud disdainful shepherdess that was his mistress.", "well, and what of him?", "if you will see a pageant truly played between the pale complexion of true love and the red glow of scorn and proud disdain, go hence a little, and i shall conduct you, if you will mark it.", "celia o, come, let us remove. the sight of lovers feedeth those in love. bring us to this sight, and you shall say i'll prove a busy actor in their play."], ["sweet phoebe, do not scorn me. do not, phoebe. say that you love me not, but say not so in bitterness. the common executioner, whose heart th' accustomed sight of death makes hard, falls not the axe upon the humbled neck but first begs pardon. will you sterner be than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?", "i would not be thy executioner. i fly thee, for i would not injure thee. thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye. 'tis pretty, sure, and very probable that eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things, who shut their coward gates on atomies, should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers. now i do frown on thee with all my heart, and if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee. now counterfeit to swoon, why, now fall down; or if thou canst not, oh, for shame, for shame, lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers. now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee. scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains some scar of it. lean upon a rush, the cicatrice and capable impressure thy palm some moment keeps. but now mine eyes, which i have darted at thee, hurt thee not. nor, i am sure, there is no force in eyes that can do hurt."], ["o dear phoebe, if ever as that ever may be near you meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy, then shall you know the wounds invisible that love's keen arrows make.", "but till that time come not thou near me. and when that time comes, afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not, as till that time i shall not pity thee.", "and why, i pray you? who might be your mother, that you insult, exult, and all at once, over the wretched? what though you have no beauty as, by my faith, i see no more in you than without candle may go dark to bed must you be therefore proud and pitiless? why, what means this? why do you look on me? i see no more in you than in the ordinary of nature's sale-work. 'od's my little life, i think she means to tangle my eyes, too. no, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it. 'tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair, your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream that can entame my spirits to your worship. you foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her, like foggy south puffing with wind and rain? you are a thousand times a properer man than she a woman. 'tis such fools as you that makes the world full of ill-favored children. 'tis not her glass but you that flatters her, and out of you she sees herself more proper than any of her lineaments can show her. but, mistress, know yourself. down on your knees and thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love, for i must tell you friendly in your ear, sell when you can; you are not for all markets. cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer. foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer. so take her to thee, shepherd. fare you well."], ["but, mistress, know yourself. down on your knees and thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love, for i must tell you friendly in your ear, sell when you can; you are not for all markets. cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer. foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer. so take her to thee, shepherd. fare you well.", "sweet youth, i pray you chide a year together. i had rather hear you chide than this man woo.", "he's fall'n in love with your foulness. silvius and she'll fall in love with my anger. if it be so, as fast as she answers thee with frowning looks, i'll sauce her with bitter words. phoebe why look you so upon me?", "for no ill will i bear you.", "i pray you, do not fall in love with me, for i am falser than vows made in wine. besides, i like you not. if you will know my house, 'tis at the tuft of olives, here hard by. will you go, sister? shepherd, ply her hard. come, sister. shepherdess, look on him better, and be not proud. though all the world could see, none could be so abused in sight as he. come, to our flock.", "dead shepherd, now i find thy saw of might: \"who ever loved that loved not at first sight?\""], ["sweet phoebe", "ha, what sayst thou, silvius?", "sweet phoebe, pity me.", "why, i am sorry for thee, gentle silvius.", "wherever sorrow is, relief would be. if you do sorrow at my grief in love, by giving love your sorrow and my grief were both extermined.", "thou hast my love. is not that neighborly?", "i would have you.", "why, that were covetousness. silvius, the time was that i hated thee, and yet it is not that i bear thee love, but since that thou canst talk of love so well, thy company, which erst was irksome to me, i will endure, and i'll employ thee too. but do not look for further recompense than thine own gladness that thou art employed.", "so holy and so perfect is my love, and i in such a poverty of grace, that i shall think it a most plenteous crop to glean the broken ears after the man that the main harvest reaps. loose now and then a scattered smile, and that i'll live upon.", "know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?"], ["not very well, but i have met him oft, and he hath bought the cottage and the bounds that the old carlot once was master of.", "think not i love him, though i ask for him. 'tis but a peevish boy yet he talks well but what care i for words? yet words do well when he that speaks them pleases those that hear. it is a pretty youth not very pretty but sure he's proud and yet his pride becomes him. he'll make a proper man. the best thing in him is his complexion; and faster than his tongue did make offense, his eye did heal it up. he is not very tall yet for his years he's tall. his leg is but so-so and yet 'tis well. there was a pretty redness in his lip, a little riper and more lusty red than that mixed in his cheek: 'twas just the difference betwixt the constant red and mingled damask. there be some women, silvius, had they marked him in parcels as i did, would have gone near to fall in love with him; but for my part i love him not nor hate him not; and yet i have more cause to hate him than to love him. for what had he to do to chide at me? he said mine eyes were black and my hair black and, now i am remembered, scorned at me. i marvel why i answered not again. but that's all one: omittance is no quittance. i'll write to him a very taunting letter, and thou shalt bear it. wilt thou, silvius?", "phoebe, with all my heart."], ["i'll write it straight. the matter's in my head and in my heart. i will be bitter with him and passing short. go with me, silvius."], ["i prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted with thee.", "they say you are a melancholy fellow.", "i am so. i do love it better than laughing.", "those that are in extremity of either are abominable fellows and betray themselves to every modern censure worse than drunkards.", "why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.", "why then, 'tis good to be a post.", "i have neither the scholar's melancholy, which is emulation; nor the musician's, which is fantastical; nor the courtier's, which is proud; nor the soldier's, which is ambitious; nor the lawyer's, which is politic; nor the lady's, which is nice; nor the lover's, which is all these, but it is a melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples, extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of my travels, in which my often rumination wraps me in a most humorous sadness."], ["a traveler. by my faith, you have great reason to be sad. i fear you have sold your own lands to see other men's. then to have seen much and to have nothing is to have rich eyes and poor hands.", "yes, i have gained my experience.", "and your experience makes you sad. i had rather have a fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad and to travel for it, too.", "good day and happiness, dear rosalind.", "nay then, god be wi' you, an you talk in blank verse.", "farewell, monsieur traveler. look you lisp and wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your own country, be out of love with your nativity, and almost chide god for making you that countenance you are, or i will scarce think you have swam in a gondola.", "rosalind why, how now, orlando, where have you been all this while? you a lover? an you serve me such another trick, never come in my sight more.", "my fair rosalind, i come within an hour of my promise."], ["break an hour's promise in love? he that will divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but a part of the thousand part of a minute in the affairs of love, it may be said of him that cupid hath clapped him o' th' shoulder, but i'll warrant him heart-whole.", "pardon me, dear rosalind.", "nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight. i had as lief be wooed of a snail.", "of a snail?", "ay, of a snail, for though he comes slowly, he carries his house on his head a better jointure, i think, than you make a woman. besides, he brings his destiny with him.", "what's that?", "why, horns, which such as you are fain to be beholding to your wives for. but he comes armed in his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife.", "virtue is no hornmaker, and my rosalind is virtuous.", "and i am your rosalind.", "it pleases him to call you so, but he hath a rosalind of a better leer than you."], ["come, woo me, woo me, for now i am in a holiday humor, and like enough to consent. what would you say to me now, an i were your very, very rosalind?", "i would kiss before i spoke.", "nay, you were better speak first, and when you were graveled for lack of matter, you might take occasion to kiss. very good orators, when they are out, they will spit; and for lovers lacking god warn us matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.", "how if the kiss be denied?", "then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.", "who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?", "marry, that should you if i were your mistress, or i should think my honesty ranker than my wit.", "what, of my suit?", "not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit. am not i your rosalind?"], ["i take some joy to say you are because i would be talking of her.", "well, in her person i say i will not have you.", "then, in mine own person i die.", "no, faith, die by attorney. the poor world is almost six thousand years old, and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person, videlicet, in a love cause. troilus had his brains dashed out with a grecian club, yet he did what he could to die before, and he is one of the patterns of love. leander, he would have lived many a fair year though hero had turned nun if it had not been for a hot midsummer night, for, good youth, he went but forth to wash him in the hellespont and, being taken with the cramp, was drowned; and the foolish chroniclers of that age found it was hero of sestos. but these are all lies. men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not for love.", "i would not have my right rosalind of this mind, for i protest her frown might kill me.", "by this hand, it will not kill a fly. but come; now i will be your rosalind in a more coming-on disposition, and ask me what you will, i will grant it.", "then love me, rosalind.", "yes, faith, will i, fridays and saturdays and all.", "and wilt thou have me?"], ["ay, and twenty such.", "what sayest thou?", "are you not good?", "i hope so.", "why then, can one desire too much of a good thing? come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us. give me your hand, orlando. what do you say, sister?", "pray thee, marry us.", "i cannot say the words.", "you must begin \"will you, orlando \"", "go to. will you, orlando, have to wife this rosalind?", "i will.", "ay, but when?", "why, now, as fast as she can marry us.", "then you must say \"i take thee, rosalind, for wife.\"", "i take thee, rosalind, for wife."], ["i might ask you for your commission, but i do take thee, orlando, for my husband. there's a girl goes before the priest, and certainly a woman's thought runs before her actions.", "so do all thoughts. they are winged.", "now tell me how long you would have her after you have possessed her.", "forever and a day.", "say \"a day\" without the \"ever.\" no, no, orlando, men are april when they woo, december when they wed. maids are may when they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives. i will be more jealous of thee than a barbary cock- pigeon over his hen, more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more newfangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires than a monkey. i will weep for nothing, like diana in the fountain, and i will do that when you are disposed to be merry. i will laugh like a hyena, and that when thou art inclined to sleep.", "but will my rosalind do so?", "by my life, she will do as i do.", "oh, but she is wise."], ["or else she could not have the wit to do this. the wiser, the waywarder. make the doors upon a woman's wit, and it will out at the casement. shut that, and 'twill out at the keyhole. stop that, 'twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney.", "a man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say \"wit, whither wilt?\"", "nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your wife's wit going to your neighbor's bed.", "and what wit could wit have to excuse that?", "marry, to say she came to seek you there. you shall never take her without her answer unless you take her without her tongue. oh, that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's occasion, let her never nurse her child herself, for she will breed it like a fool.", "for these two hours, rosalind, i will leave thee.", "alas, dear love, i cannot lack thee two hours.", "i must attend the duke at dinner. by two o'clock i will be with thee again.", "ay, go your ways, go your ways. i knew what you would prove. my friends told me as much, and i thought no less. that flattering tongue of yours won me. 'tis but one cast away, and so, come, death. two o'clock is your hour?"], ["ay, sweet rosalind.", "by my troth, and in good earnest, and so god mend me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous, if you break one jot of your promise or come one minute behind your hour, i will think you the most pathetical break-promise and the most hollow lover and the most unworthy of her you call rosalind that may be chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful. therefore beware my censure, and keep your promise.", "with no less religion than if thou wert indeed my rosalind. so, adieu.", "well, time is the old justice that examines all such offenders, and let time try. adieu.", "you have simply misused our sex in your love-prate. we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your head and show the world what the bird hath done to her own nest.", "o coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou didst know how many fathom deep i am in love. but it cannot be sounded; my affection hath an unknown bottom, like the bay of portugal.", "or rather bottomless, that as fast as you pour affection in, it runs out."], ["no, that same wicked bastard of venus that was begot of thought, conceived of spleen, and born of madness, that blind rascally boy that abuses everyone's eyes because his own are out, let him be judge how deep i am in love. i'll tell thee, aliena, i cannot be out of the sight of orlando. i'll go find a shadow and sigh till he come.", "and i'll sleep."], ["which is he that killed the deer?", "sir, it was i.", "let's present him to the duke like a roman conqueror. and it would do well to set the deer's horns upon his head for a branch of victory. have you no song, forester, for this purpose?", "yes, sir.", "sing it. 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise enough.", ""], ["how say you now? is it not past two o'clock? and here much orlando.", "i warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain he hath ta'en his bow and arrows and is gone forth to sleep.", "look who comes here.", "rosalind my errand is to you, fair youth. my gentle phoebe did bid me give you this. i know not the contents, but as i guess by the stern brow and waspish action which she did use as she was writing of it, it bears an angry tenor. pardon me. i am but as a guiltless messenger.", "patience herself would startle at this letter and play the swaggerer. bear this, bear all. she says i am not fair, that i lack manners. she calls me proud, and that she could not love me were man as rare as phoenix. 'od's my will, her love is not the hare that i do hunt. why writes she so to me? well, shepherd, well, this is a letter of your own device.", "no, i protest, i know not the contents. phoebe did write it."], ["come, come, you are a fool, and turned into the extremity of love. i saw her hand. she has a leathern hand, a freestone-colored hand. i verily did think that her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands. she has a huswife's hand but that's no matter. i say she never did invent this letter. this is a man's invention, and his hand.", "sure it is hers.", "why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style, a style for challengers. why, she defies me like turk to christian. women's gentle brain could not drop forth such giant-rude invention, such ethiop words, blacker in their effect than in their countenance. will you hear the letter?", "so please you, for i never heard it yet, yet heard too much of phoebe's cruelty.", "she phoebes me. mark how the tyrant writes. art thou god to shepherd turned, that a maiden's heart hath burned? can a woman rail thus?", "call you this railing?", "why, thy godhead laid apart, warr'st thou with a woman's heart? did you ever hear such railing? whiles the eye of man did woo me, that could do no vengeance to me. meaning me a beast."], ["if the scorn of your bright eyne have power to raise such love in mine, alack, in me what strange effect would they work in mild aspect? whiles you chid me, i did love. how then might your prayers move? he that brings this love to thee little knows this love in me, and by him seal up thy mind whether that thy youth and kind will the faithful offer take of me, and all that i can make, or else by him my love deny, and then i'll study how to die.", "call you this chiding?", "alas, poor shepherd.", "do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. wilt thou love such a woman? what, to make thee an instrument and play false strains upon thee? not to be endured. well, go your way to her, for i see love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to her: that if she love me, i charge her to love thee; if she will not, i will never have her unless thou entreat for her. if you be a true lover, hence and not a word, for here comes more company.", "good morrow, fair ones. pray you, if you know, where in the purlieus of this forest stands a sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?"], ["west of this place, down in the neighbor bottom, the rank of osiers by the murmuring stream left on your right hand brings you to the place. but at this hour the house doth keep itself. there's none within.", "if that an eye may profit by a tongue, then should i know you by description. such garments, and such years. \"the boy is fair, of female favor, and bestows himself like a ripe sister; the woman low and browner than her brother.\" are not you the owner of the house i did inquire for?", "it is no boast, being asked, to say we are.", "orlando doth commend him to you both, and to that youth he calls his rosalind he sends this bloody napkin. are you he?", "i am. what must we understand by this?", "some of my shame, if you will know of me what man i am, and how, and why, and where this handkercher was stained.", "i pray you, tell it."], ["when last the young orlando parted from you, he left a promise to return again within an hour, and pacing through the forest, chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy, lo, what befell. he threw his eye aside and mark what object did present itself: under an old oak, whose boughs were mossed with age and high top bald with dry antiquity, a wretched, ragged man, o'ergrown with hair, lay sleeping on his back. about his neck a green and gilded snake had wreathed itself, who with her head, nimble in threats, approached the opening of his mouth. but suddenly, seeing orlando, it unlinked itself and, with indented glides, did slip away into a bush, under which bush's shade a lioness, with udders all drawn dry, lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch when that the sleeping man should stir for 'tis the royal disposition of that beast to prey on nothing that doth seem as dead. this seen, orlando did approach the man and found it was his brother, his elder brother.", "oh, i have heard him speak of that same brother, and he did render him the most unnatural that lived amongst men.", "and well he might so do, for well i know he was unnatural.", "but to orlando: did he leave him there, food to the sucked and hungry lioness?"], ["twice did he turn his back and purposed so, but kindness, nobler ever than revenge, and nature, stronger than his just occasion, made him give battle to the lioness, who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling, from miserable slumber i awaked.", "are you his brother?", "was 't you he rescued?", "was 't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?", "'twas i, but 'tis not i. i do not shame to tell you what i was, since my conversion so sweetly tastes, being the thing i am.", "but for the bloody napkin?", "by and by. when from the first to last betwixt us two tears our recountments had most kindly bathed as how i came into that desert place in brief, he led me to the gentle duke, who gave me fresh array and entertainment, committing me unto my brother's love, who led me instantly unto his cave, there stripped himself, and here upon his arm the lioness had torn some flesh away, which all this while had bled. and now he fainted, and cried in fainting upon rosalind. brief, i recovered him, bound up his wound, and after some small space, being strong at heart,"], ["he sent me hither, stranger as i am, to tell this story, that you might excuse his broken promise, and to give this napkin dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth that he in sport doth call his rosalind.", "why, how now, ganymede, sweet ganymede?", "many will swoon when they do look on blood.", "there is more in it. cousin ganymede.", "look, he recovers.", "i would i were at home.", "we'll lead you thither. i pray you, will you take him by the arm?", "be of good cheer, youth. you a man? you lack a man's heart.", "i do so, i confess it. ah, sirrah, a body would think this was well-counterfeited. i pray you tell your brother how well i counterfeited. heigh-ho.", "this was not counterfeit. there is too great testimony in your complexion that it was a passion of earnest.", "counterfeit, i assure you.", "well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man."], ["so i do. but i' faith, i should have been a woman by right.", "come, you look paler and paler. pray you, draw homewards. good sir, go with us.", "that will i, for i must bear answer back how you excuse my brother, rosalind.", "i shall devise something. but i pray you commend my counterfeiting to him. will you go?"], ["we shall find a time, audrey. patience, gentle audrey.", "faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman's saying.", "a most wicked sir oliver, audrey, a most vile martext. but, audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you.", "ay, i know who 'tis. he hath no interest in me in the world.", "here comes the man you mean.", "it is meat and drink to me to see a clown. by my troth, we that have good wits have much to answer for. we shall be flouting. we cannot hold.", "good ev'n, audrey.", "god gi' good ev'n, william.", "and good ev'n to you, sir.", "good ev'n, gentle friend. cover thy head, cover thy head. nay, prithee, be covered. how old are you, friend?"], ["five-and-twenty, sir.", "a ripe age. is thy name william?", "william, sir.", "a fair name. wast born i' th' forest here?", "ay, sir, i thank god.", "\"thank god.\" a good answer. art rich?", "'faith, sir, so-so.", "\"so-so\" is good, very good, very excellent good. and yet it is not: it is but so-so. art thou wise?", "ay, sir, i have a pretty wit.", "why, thou sayst well. i do now remember a saying: \"the fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.\" the heathen philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth, meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open. you do love this maid?", "i do, sir.", "give me your hand. art thou learned?", "no, sir."], ["then learn this of me: to have is to have. for it is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty the other. for all your writers do consent that ipse is \"he.\" now, you are not ipse, for i am he.", "which he, sir?", "he, sir, that must marry this woman. therefore, you clown, abandon which is, in the vulgar, \"leave\" the society which in the boorish is \"company\" of this female which in the common is \"woman\"; which together is, abandon the society of this female, or, clown, thou perishest; or, to thy better understanding, diest; or, to wit, i kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death, thy liberty into bondage. i will deal in poison with thee, or in bastinado, or in steel. i will bandy with thee in faction. i will o'errun thee with policy. i will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways. therefore tremble and depart.", "do, good william.", "god rest you merry, sir.", "our master and mistress seeks you. come away, away.", "trip, audrey, trip, audrey. i attend, i attend."], ["is 't possible that on so little acquaintance you should like her? that, but seeing, you should love her? and loving, woo? and wooing, she should grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?", "neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor her sudden consenting, but say with me \"i love aliena\"; say with her that she loves me; consent with both that we may enjoy each other. it shall be to your good, for my father's house and all the revenue that was old sir rowland's will i estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.", "you have my consent. let your wedding be tomorrow. thither will i invite the duke and all's contented followers. go you and prepare aliena, for look you, here comes my rosalind.", "god save you, brother.", "and you, fair sister.", "o my dear orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf."], ["it is my arm.", "i thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a lion.", "wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.", "did your brother tell you how i counterfeited to swoon when he showed me your handkercher?", "ay, and greater wonders than that.", "oh, i know where you are. nay, 'tis true. there was never anything so sudden but the fight of two rams and caesar's thrasonical brag of \"i came, saw, and overcame.\" for your brother and my sister no sooner met but they looked, no sooner looked but they loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason, no sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy; and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs to marriage, which they will climb incontinent, or else be incontinent before marriage. they are in the very wrath of love, and they will together. clubs cannot part them.", "they shall be married tomorrow, and i will bid the duke to the nuptial. but oh, how bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another man's eyes. by so much the more shall i tomorrow be at the height of heart-heaviness, by how much i shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for."], ["why, then, tomorrow i cannot serve your turn for rosalind?", "i can live no longer by thinking.", "i will weary you then no longer with idle talking. know of me then for now i speak to some purpose that i know you are a gentleman of good conceit. i speak not this that you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge, insomuch i say i know you are. neither do i labor for a greater esteem than may in some little measure draw a belief from you to do yourself good, and not to grace me. believe then, if you please, that i can do strange things. i have, since i was three year old, conversed with a magician, most profound in his art and yet not damnable. if you do love rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries it out, when your brother marries aliena shall you marry her. i know into what straits of fortune she is driven, and it is not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow, human as she is, and without any danger.", "speak'st thou in sober meanings?", "by my life i do, which i tender dearly, though i say i am a magician. therefore put you in your best array, bid your friends; for if you will be married tomorrow, you shall, and to rosalind, if you will.", "look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.", "youth, you have done me much ungentleness to show the letter that i writ to you."], ["i care not if i have. it is my study to seem despiteful and ungentle to you. you are there followed by a faithful shepherd. look upon him, love him; he worships you.", "good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.", "it is to be all made of sighs and tears, and so am i for phoebe.", "and i for ganymede.", "and i for rosalind.", "and i for no woman.", "it is to be all made of faith and service, and so am i for phoebe.", "and i for ganymede.", "and i for rosalind.", "and i for no woman.", "it is to be all made of fantasy, all made of passion and all made of wishes, all adoration, duty, and observance, all humbleness, all patience and impatience, all purity, all trial, all observance, and so am i for phoebe.", "and so am i for ganymede.", "and so am i for rosalind."], ["and so am i for no woman.", "if this be so, why blame you me to love you?", "if this be so, why blame you me to love you?", "if this be so, why blame you me to love you?", "why do you speak, too, \"why blame you me to love you?\"?", "to her that is not here, nor doth not hear.", "pray you, no more of this. 'tis like the howling of irish wolves against the moon. silvius i will help you, if i can. phoebe i would love you if i could. tomorrow meet me all together. phoebe i will marry you if ever i marry woman, and i'll be married tomorrow. orlando i will satisfy you if ever i satisfy man, and you shall be married tomorrow. silvius i will content you, if what pleases you contents you, and you shall be married tomorrow. orlando as you love rosalind, meet. silvius as you love phoebe, meet. and as i love no woman, i'll meet. so fare you well. i have left you commands.", "i'll not fail, if i live.", "nor i.", "nor i."], ["tomorrow is the joyful day, audrey. tomorrow will we be married.", "i do desire it with all my heart, and i hope it is no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world.", "here comes two of the banished duke's pages.", "well met, honest gentleman.", "by my troth, well met. come, sit, sit, and a song.", "we are for you. sit i' th' middle.", "shall we clap into 't roundly, without hawking or spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice?", "i' faith, i' faith, and both in a tune like two gypsies on a horse.", ""], ["", "truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the ditty, yet the note was very untunable.", "you are deceived, sir. we kept time. we lost not our time.", "by my troth, yes. i count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song. god be wi' you, and god mend your voices. come, audrey."], ["dost thou believe, orlando, that the boy can do all this that he hath promisd?", "i sometimes do believe and sometimes do not, as those that fear they hope, and know they fear.", "patience once more whiles our compact is urged. duke senior you say, if i bring in your rosalind, you will bestow her on orlando here?", "that would i, had i kingdoms to give with her.", "orlando and you say you will have her when i bring her?", "that would i, were i of all kingdoms king.", "phoebe you say you'll marry me if i be willing?", "that will i, should i die the hour after.", "but if you do refuse to marry me, you'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?"], ["so is the bargain.", "silvius you say that you'll have phoebe if she will?", "though to have her and death were both one thing.", "i have promised to make all this matter even. keep you your word, o duke, to give your daughter, you yours, orlando, to receive his daughter. keep your word, phoebe, that you'll marry me or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd. keep your word, silvius, that you'll marry her if she refuse me. and from hence i go to make these doubts all even.", "i do remember in this shepherd boy some lively touches of my daughter's favor.", "my lord, the first time that i ever saw him methought he was a brother to your daughter. but, my good lord, this boy is forest-born and hath been tutored in the rudiments of many desperate studies by his uncle, whom he reports to be a great magician obscurd in the circle of this forest."], ["there is sure another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the ark. here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.", "salutation and greeting to you all.", "good my lord, bid him welcome. this is the motley-minded gentleman that i have so often met in the forest. he hath been a courtier, he swears.", "if any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation. i have trod a measure. i have flattered a lady. i have been politic with my friend, smooth with mine enemy. i have undone three tailors. i have had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.", "and how was that ta'en up?", "faith, we met and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.", "how \"seventh cause\"? good my lord, like this fellow.", "i like him very well."], ["god 'ild you, sir. i desire you of the like. i press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country copulatives, to swear and to forswear, according as marriage binds and blood breaks. a poor virgin, sir, an ill-favored thing, sir, but mine own. a poor humor of mine, sir, to take that that no man else will. rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor house, as your pearl in your foul oyster.", "by my faith, he is very swift and sententious.", "according to the fool's bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.", "but for the seventh cause. how did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause?", "upon a lie seven times removed. bear your body more seeming, audrey. as thus, sir: i did dislike the cut of a certain courtier's beard. he sent me word if i said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it was. this is called \"the retort courteous.\" if i sent him word again it was not well cut, he would send me word he cut it to please himself. this is called \"the quip modest.\" if again it was not well cut, he disabled my judgment. this is called \"the reply churlish.\" if again it was not well cut, he would answer i spake not true. this is called \"the reproof valiant.\" if again it was not well cut, he would say i lie. this is called \"the countercheck quarrelsome,\" and so to \"the lie circumstantial\" and \"the lie direct.\"", "and how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?"], ["i durst go no further than the lie circumstantial, nor he durst not give me the lie direct, and so we measured swords and parted.", "can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?", "o sir, we quarrel in print, by the book, as you have books for good manners. i will name you the degrees: the first, \"the retort courteous\"; the second, \"the quip modest\"; the third, \"the reply churlish\"; the fourth, \"the reproof valiant\"; the fifth, \"the countercheque quarrelsome\"; the sixth, \"the lie with circumstance\"; the seventh, \"the lie direct.\" all these you may avoid but the lie direct, and you may avoid that, too, with an \"if.\" i knew when seven justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the parties were met themselves, one of them thought but of an \"if,\" as: \"if you said so, then i said so.\" and they shook hands and swore brothers. your \"if\" is the only peacemaker: much virtue in \"if.\"", "is not this a rare fellow, my lord? he's as good at anything and yet a fool.", "he uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit.", "then is there mirth in heaven when earthly things, made even, atone together."], ["good duke, receive thy daughter. hymen from heaven brought her, yea, brought her hither, that thou mightst join her hand with his whose heart within his bosom is.", "duke senior to you i give myself, for i am yours. orlando to you i give myself, for i am yours.", "if there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.", "if there be truth in sight, you are my rosalind.", "if sight and shape be true, why then, my love adieu.", "duke senior i'll have no father, if you be not he. orlando i'll have no husband, if you be not he, phoebe nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.", "peace, ho! i bar confusion. 'tis i must make conclusion of these most strange events. here's eight that must take hands to join in hymen's bands, if truth holds true contents. orlando rosalind you and you no cross shall part. oliver celia you and you are heart in heart. phoebe you to his love must accord or have a woman to your lord. touchstone audrey you and you are sure together as the winter to foul weather. whiles a wedlock hymn we sing, feed yourselves with questioning, that reason wonder may diminish how thus we met, and these things finish."], ["", "o my dear niece, welcome thou art to me, even daughter, welcome in no less degree.", "i will not eat my word. now thou art mine, thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.", "let me have audience for a word or two. i am the second son of old sir rowland, that bring these tidings to this fair assembly. duke frederick, hearing how that every day men of great worth resorted to this forest, addressed a mighty power, which were on foot in his own conduct, purposely to take his brother here and put him to the sword. and to the skirts of this wild wood he came, where, meeting with an old religious man, after some question with him, was converted both from his enterprise and from the world, his crown bequeathing to his banished brother, and all their lands restored to them again that were with him exiled. this to be true i do engage my life."], ["welcome, young man. thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding: to one his lands withheld, and to the other a land itself at large, a potent dukedom. first, in this forest let us do those ends that here were well begun and well begot, and, after, every of this happy number that have endured shrewd days and nights with us shall share the good of our returnd fortune according to the measure of their states. meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity, and fall into our rustic revelry. play, music. and you brides and bridegrooms all, with measure heaped in joy to th' measures fall.", "sir, by your patience: if i heard you rightly, the duke hath put on a religious life and thrown into neglect the pompous court.", "he hath.", "to him will i. out of these convertites there is much matter to be heard and learned. duke senior you to your former honor i bequeath; your patience and your virtue well deserves it. orlando you to a love that your true faith doth merit. oliver you to your land, and love, and great allies. silvius you to a long and well-deservd bed."], ["touchstone and you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage is but for two months victualled. so to your pleasures. i am for other than for dancing measures.", "stay, jaques, stay.", "to see no pastime i. what you would have i'll stay to know at your abandoned cave.", "proceed, proceed. we'll so begin these rites as we do trust they'll end, in true delights."], ["it is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue, but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue. if it be true that good wine needs no bush, 'tis true that a good play needs no epilogue. yet to good wine they do use good bushes, and good plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues. what a case am i in, then, that am neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play. i am not furnished like a beggar; therefore to beg will not become me. my way is to conjure you, and i'll begin with the women. i charge you, o women, for the love you bear to men, to like as much of this play as please you. and i charge you, o men, for the love you bear to women as i perceive by your simpering, none of you hates them that between you and the women the play may please. if i were a woman, i would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me, complexions that liked me, and breaths that i defied not. and i am sure as many as have good beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths will, for my kind offer, when i make curtsy, bid me farewell."]], [["proceed, solinus, to procure my fall, and by the doom of death end woes and all.", "merchant of syracuse, plead no more. i am not partial to infringe our laws. the enmity and discord which of late sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke to merchants, our well-dealing countrymen, who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives, have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods, excludes all pity from our threatening looks. for, since the mortal and intestine jars 'twixt thy seditious countrymen and us, it hath in solemn synods been decreed both by the syracusians and ourselves, to admit no traffic to our adverse towns. nay, more, if any born at ephesus be seen at any syracusian marts and fairs; again, if any syracusian born come to the bay of ephesus, he dies, his goods confiscate to the duke's dispose, unless a thousand marks be levid to quit the penalty and to ransom him. thy substance, valued at the highest rate, cannot amount unto a hundred marks; therefore by law thou art condemned to die.", "yet this my comfort: when your words are done, my woes end likewise with the evening sun."], ["well, syracusian, say in brief the cause why thou dep-artedst from thy native home and for what cause thou camest to ephesus.", "a heavier task could not have been imposed than i to speak my griefs unspeakable; yet, that the world may witness that my end was wrought by nature, not by vile offense, i'll utter what my sorrow gives me leave. in syracusa was i born, and wed unto a woman happy but for me, and by me, had not our hap been bad. with her i lived in joy. our wealth increased by prosperous voyages i often made to epidamnum, till my factor's death and the great care of goods at random left drew me from kind embracements of my spouse; from whom my absence was not six months old before herselfalmost at fainting under the pleasing punishment that women bear had made provision for her following me and soon and safe arrivd where i was. there had she not been long but she became a joyful mother of two goodly sons, and, which was strange, the one so like the other as could not be distinguished but by names. that very hour, and in the selfsame inn, a meaner woman was deliverd of such a burden, male twins, both alike. those, for their parents were exceeding poor, i bought and brought up to attend my sons. my wife, not meanly proud of two such boys, made daily motions for our home return. unwilling, i agreed. alas, too soon we came aboard."], ["a league from epidamnum had we sailed before the always-wind-obeying deep gave any tragic instance of our harm; but longer did we not retain much hope; for what obscured light the heavens did grant did but convey unto our fearful minds a doubtful warrant of immediate death, which though myself would gladly have embraced, yet the incessant weepings of my wife, weeping before for what she saw must come, and piteous plainings of the pretty babes, that mourned for fashion, ignorant what to fear, forced me to seek delays for them and me. and this it was, for other means was none: the sailors sought for safety by our boat and left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us. my wife, more careful for the latter-born, had fastened him unto a small spare mast, such as seafaring men provide for storms. to him one of the other twins was bound, whilst i had been like heedful of the other. the children thus disposed, my wife and i, fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed, fastened ourselves at either end the mast and, floating straight, obedient to the stream, was carried towards corinth, as we thought. at length the sun, gazing upon the earth, dispersed those vapors that offended us, and by the benefit of his wished light the seas waxed calm, and we discoverd two ships from far, making amain to us, of corinth that, of epidaurus this. but ere they came,o, let me say no more! gather the sequel by that went before."], ["nay, forward, old man. do not break off so, for we may pity though not pardon thee.", "o, had the gods done so, i had not now worthily termed them merciless to us. for, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues, we were encounterd by a mighty rock, which being violently borne upon, our helpful ship was splitted in the midst; so that, in this unjust divorce of us, fortune had left to both of us alike what to delight in, what to sorrow for. her part, poor soul, seeming as burdend with lesser weight, but not with lesser woe, was carried with more speed before the wind, and in our sight they three were taken up by fishermen of corinth, as we thought. at length, another ship had seized on us and, knowing whom it was their hap to save, gave healthful welcome to their shipwracked guests, and would have reft the fishers of their prey had not their bark been very slow of sail; and therefore homeward did they bend their course. thus have you heard me severed from my bliss; that by misfortunes was my life prolonged to tell sad stories of my own mishaps.", "and for the sake of them thou sorrowest for, do me the favour to dilate at full what hath befall'n of them and thee till now.", "my youngest boy, and yet my eldest care, at eighteen years became inquisitive after his brother, and importuned me that his attendantso his case was like,"], ["reft of his brother, but retained his name might bear him company in the quest of him, whom whilst i laboured of a love to see, i hazarded the loss of whom i loved. five summers have i spent in farthest greece, roaming clean through the bounds of asia, and, coasting homeward, came to ephesus, hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought or that or any place that harbors men. but here must end the story of my life; and happy were i in my timely death could all my travels warrant me they live.", "hapless egeon, whom the fates have marked to bear the extremity of dire mishap, now, trust me, were it not against our laws, against my crown, my oath, my dignity, which princes, would they, may not disannul, my soul would sue as advocate for thee. but though thou art adjudgd to the death, and passd sentence may not be recalled but to our honour's great disparagement, yet will i favor thee in what i can. therefore, merchant, i'll limit thee this day to seek thy life by beneficial help. try all the friends thou hast in ephesus; beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum, and live. if no, then thou art doom'd to die. jailer, take him to thy custody.", "i will, my lord.", "hopeless and helpless doth egeon wend, but to procrastinate his lifeless end."], ["therefore give out you are of epidamnum, lest that your goods too soon be confiscate. this very day a syracusian merchant is apprehended for arrival here and, not being able to buy out his life, according to the statute of the town dies ere the weary sun set in the west. there is your money that i had to keep.", "go bear it to the centaur, where we host, and stay there, dromio, till i come to thee. within this hour it will be dinnertime. till that, i'll view the manners of the town, peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings, and then return and sleep within mine inn, for with long travel i am stiff and weary. get thee away.", "many a man would take you at your word and go indeed, having so good a mean.", "a trusty villain, sir, that very oft, when i am dull with care and melancholy, lightens my humor with his merry jests. what, will you walk with me about the town and then go to my inn and dine with me?", "i am invited, sir, to certain merchants, of whom i hope to make much benefit."], ["i crave your pardon. soon at five o'clock, please you, i'll meet with you upon the mart and afterward consort you till bedtime. my present business calls me from you now.", "farewell till then. i will go lose myself and wander up and down to view the city.", "sir, i commend you to your own content.", "he that commends me to mine own content commends me to the thing i cannot get. i to the world am like a drop of water that in the ocean seeks another drop, who, falling there to find his fellow forth, unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself. so i, to find a mother and a brother, in quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.", "here comes the almanac of my true date. what now? how chance thou art returned so soon?", "returned so soon? rather approach'd too late! the capon burns; the pig falls from the spit; the clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell; my mistress made it one upon my cheek. she is so hot because the meat is cold; the meat is cold because you come not home; you come not home because you have no stomach; you have no stomach, having broke your fast; but we that know what 'tis to fast and pray are penitent for your default today."], ["stop in your wind, sir. tell me this, i pray: where have you left the money that i gave you?", "o, sixpence, that i had o' wednesday last to pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper? the saddler had it, sir; i kept it not.", "i am not in a sportive humor now. tell me, and dally not: where is the money? we being strangers here, how dar'st thou trust so great a charge from thine own custody?", "i pray you, jest, sir, as you sit at dinner. i from my mistress come to you in post; if i return, i shall be post indeed, for she will scour your fault upon my pate. methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock, and strike you home without a messenger.", "come, dromio, come, these jests are out of season. reserve them till a merrier hour than this. where is the gold i gave in charge to thee?", "to me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me!", "come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness, and tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.", "my charge was but to fetch you from the mart home to your house, the phoenix, sir, to dinner. my mistress and her sister stays for you.", "now, as i am a christian, answer me in what safe place you have bestowed my money, or i shall break that merry sconce of yours that stands on tricks when i am undisposed. where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?"], ["i have some marks of yours upon my pate, some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders, but not a thousand marks between you both. if i should pay your worship those again, perchance you will not bear them patiently.", "thy mistress' marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?", "your worship's wife, my mistress at the phoenix, she that doth fast till you come home to dinner and prays that you will hie you home to dinner.", "what, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face, being forbid? there, take you that, sir knave. dromio of ephesus", "what mean you, sir? for god's sake, hold your hands. nay, an you will not, sir, i'll take my heels.", "upon my life, by some device or other the villain is o'erraught of all my money. they say this town is full of cozenage, as nimble jugglers that deceive the eye, dark-working sorcerers that change the mind, soul-killing witches that deform the body, disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks, and many suchlike liberties of sin. if it prove so, i will be gone the sooner. i'll to the centaur to go seek this slave. i greatly fear my money is not safe."], ["neither my husband nor the slave returned that in such haste i sent to seek his master? sure, luciana, it is two o'clock.", "perhaps some merchant hath invited him, and from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner. good sister, let us dine and never fret. a man is master of his liberty; time is their master, and when they see time they'll go or come. if so, be patient, sister.", "why should their liberty than ours be more?", "because their business still lies out o' door.", "look when i serve him so, he takes it ill.", "o, know he is the bridle of your will.", "there's none but asses will be bridled so.", "why, headstrong liberty is lashed with woe. there's nothing situate under heaven's eye but hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky. the beasts, the fishes, and the wingd fowls are their males' subjects and at their controls. man, more divine, the masters of all these,"], ["lord of the wide world and wild wat'ry seas, endued with intellectual sense and souls, of more preeminence than fish and fowls, are masters to their females, and their lords. then let your will attend on their accords.", "this servitude makes you to keep unwed.", "not this, but troubles of the marriage bed.", "but, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.", "ere i learn love, i'll practice to obey.", "how if your husband start some otherwhere?", "till he come home again, i would forbear.", "patience unmoved! no marvel though she pause; they can be meek that have no other cause. a wretched soul, bruised with adversity we bid be quiet when we hear it cry, but were we burdened with like weight of pain, as much or more we should ourselves complain. so thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee, with urging helpless patience would relieve me; but, if thou live to see like right bereft, this fool-begged patience in thee will be left.", "well, i will marry one day, but to try. here comes your man. now is your husband nigh."], ["say, is your tardy master now at hand?", "nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.", "say, didst thou speak with him? know'st thou his mind?", "ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear. beshrew his hand, i scarce could understand it.", "spake he so doubtfully thou couldst not feel his meaning?", "nay, he struck so plainly i could too well feel his blows, and withal so doubtfully that i could scarce understand them.", "but say, i prithee, is he coming home? it seems he hath great care to please his wife.", "why, mistress, sure my master is horn mad.", "horn mad, thou villain!", "i mean not cuckold mad, but sure he is stark mad. when i desired him to come home to dinner, he asked me for a thousand marks in gold. \"'tis dinnertime,\" quoth i. \"my gold,\" quoth he."], ["\"your meat doth burn,\" quoth i. \"my gold,\" quoth he. \"will you come?\" quoth i. \"my gold,\" quoth he. \"where is the thousand marks i gave thee, villain?\" \"the pig,\" quoth i, \"is burned.\" \"my gold,\" quoth he. \"my mistress, sir,\" quoth i. \"hang up thy mistress! i know not thy mistress. out on thy mistress!\"", "quoth who?", "quoth my master. \"i know,\" quoth he, \"no house, no wife, no mistress.\" so that my errand, due unto my tongue, i thank him, i bare home upon my shoulders, for, in conclusion, he did beat me there.", "go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.", "go back again and be new beaten home? for god's sake, send some other messenger.", "back, slave, or i will break thy pate across.", "and he will bless that cross with other beating. between you, i shall have a holy head.", "hence, prating peasant! fetch thy master home.", "am i so round with you as you with me, that like a football you do spurn me thus? you spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither. if i last in this service, you must case me in leather.", "fie, how impatience loureth in your face."], ["his company must do his minions grace, whilst i at home starve for a merry look. hath homely age th' alluring beauty took from my poor cheek? then he hath wasted it. are my discourses dull? barren my wit? if voluble and sharp discourse be marred, unkindness blunts it more than marble hard. do their gay vestments his affections bait? that's not my fault; he's master of my state. what ruins are in me that can be found by him not ruined? then is he the ground of my defeatures. my decayd fair a sunny look of his would soon repair. but, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale and feeds from home. poor i am but his stale.", "self-harming jealousy, fie, beat it hence.", "unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense. i know his eye doth homage otherwhere, or else what lets it but he would be here? sister, you know he promised me a chain. would that alone o' love he would detain, so he would keep fair quarter with his bed. i see the jewel best enameld will lose his beauty. yet the gold bides still that others touch, and often touching will wear gold; yet no man that hath a name by falsehood and corruption doth it shame. since that my beauty cannot please his eye, i'll weep what's left away, and weeping die.", "how many fond fools serve mad jealousy!"], ["the gold i gave to dromio is laid up safe at the centaur, and the heedful slave is wandered forth, in care to seek me out. by computation and mine host's report, i could not speak with dromio since at first i sent him from the mart. see, here he comes.", "how now, sir? is your merry humor altered? as you love strokes, so jest with me again. you know no centaur? you received no gold? your mistress sent to have me home to dinner? my house was at the phoenix? wast thou mad, that thus so madly thou didst answer me?", "what answer, sir? when spake i such a word?", "even now, even here, not half an hour since.", "i did not see you since you sent me hence, home to the centaur with the gold you gave me.", "villain, thou didst deny the gold's receipt and told'st me of a mistress and a dinner, for which, i hope, thou felt'st i was displeased.", "i am glad to see you in this merry vein. what means this jest? i pray you, master, tell me?"], ["yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth? think'st thou i jest? hold, take thou that and that. dromio of syracuse", "hold, sir, for god's sake! now your jest is earnest. upon what bargain do you give it me?", "because that i familiarly sometimes do use you for my fool and chat with you, your sauciness will jest upon my love and make a common of my serious hours. when the sun shines, let foolish gnats make sport, but creep in crannies when he hides his beams. if you will jest with me, know my aspect, and fashion your demeanor to my looks, or i will beat this method in your sconce.", "\"sconce\" call you it? so you would leave battering, i had rather have it a \"head.\" an you use these blows long, i must get a sconce for my head and ensconce it too, or else i shall seek my wit in my shoulders. but i pray, sir, why am i beaten?", "dost thou not know?", "nothing, sir, but that i am beaten.", "shall i tell you why?", "ay, sir, and wherefore, for they say every why hath a wherefore."], ["\"why\" first: for flouting me; and then \"wherefore\": for urging it the second time to me.", "was there ever any man thus beaten out of season, when in the \"why\" and the \"wherefore\" is neither rhyme nor reason? well, sir, i thank you.", "thank me, sir, for what?", "marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.", "i'll make you amends next, to give you nothing for something. but say, sir, is it dinnertime?", "no, sir, i think the meat wants that i have.", "in good time, sir, what's that?", "basting.", "well, sir, then 'twill be dry.", "if it be, sir, i pray you, eat none of it.", "your reason?", "lest it make you choleric and purchase me another dry basting.", "well, sir, learn to jest in good time. there's a time for all things.", "i durst have denied that before you were so choleric."], ["by what rule, sir?", "marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of father time himself.", "let's hear it.", "there's no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature.", "may he not do it by fine and recovery?", "yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and recover the lost hair of another man.", "why is time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an excrement?", "because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts, and what he hath scanted men in hair, he hath given them in wit.", "why, but there's many a man hath more hair than wit.", "not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.", "why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit."], ["the plainer dealer, the sooner lost. yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity.", "for what reason?", "for two, and sound ones too.", "nay, not sound, i pray you.", "sure ones, then.", "nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.", "certain ones, then.", "name them.", "the one, to save the money that he spends in tiring; the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge.", "you would all this time have proved there is no time for all things.", "marry, and did, sir: namely, e'en no time to recover hair lost by nature."], ["but your reason was not substantial why there is no time to recover.", "thus i mend it: time himself is bald and therefore, to the world's end, will have bald followers.", "i knew 'twould be a bald conclusion: but soft, who wafts us yonder?", "ay, ay, antipholus, look strange and frown. some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects. i am not adriana, nor thy wife. the time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow that never words were music to thine ear, that never object pleasing in thine eye, that never touch well welcome to thy hand, that never meat sweet-savored in thy taste, unless i spake, or looked, or touched, or carved to thee. how comes it now, my husband, o, how comes it that thou art thus estranged from thyself? \"thyself\" i call it, being strange to me, that, undividable, incorporate, am better than thy dear self's better part. ah, do not tear away thyself from me! for know, my love, as easy mayest thou fall a drop of water in the breaking gulf, and take unmingled thence that drop again without addition or diminishing, as take from me thyself and not me too. how dearly would it touch thee to the quick, shouldst thou but hear i were licentious and that this body, consecrate to thee,"], ["by ruffian lust should be contaminate! wouldst thou not spit at me, and spurn at me, and hurl the name of husband in my face, and tear the stained skin off my harlot brow, and from my false hand cut the wedding ring, and break it with a deep-divorcing vow? i know thou canst, and therefore see thou do it. i am possessed with an adulterate blot; my blood is mingled with the crime of lust; for if we too be one, and thou play false, i do digest the poison of thy flesh, being strumpeted by thy contagion. keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed, i live disstained, thou undishonord.", "plead you to me, fair dame? i know you not. in ephesus i am but two hours old, as strange unto your town as to your talk, who, every word by all my wit being scanned, want wit in all one word to understand.", "fie, brother, how the world is changed with you! when were you wont to use my sister thus? she sent for you by dromio home to dinner.", "by dromio?", "by me?", "by thee; and this thou didst return from him: that he did buffet thee and, in his blows, denied my house for his, me for his wife.", "did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman? what is the course and drift of your compact?"], ["i, sir? i never saw her till this time.", "villain, thou liest; for even her very words didst thou deliver to me on the mart.", "i never spake with her in all my life.", "how can she thus then call us by our names unless it be by inspiration?", "how ill agrees it with your gravity to counterfeit thus grossly with your slave, abetting him to thwart me in my mood. be it my wrong you are from me exempt, but wrong not that wrong with a more contempt. come, i will fasten on this sleeve of thine. thou art an elm, my husband, i a vine, whose weakness, married to thy stronger state, makes me with thy strength to communicate. if aught possess thee from me, it is dross, usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss, who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.", "to me she speaks; she moves me for her theme. what, was i married to her in my dream? or sleep i now and think i hear all this? what error drives our eyes and ears amiss? until i know this sure uncertainty i'll entertain the offered fallacy.", "dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.", "o, for my beads! i cross me for a sinner. this is the fairy land. o spite of spites!"], ["we talk with goblins, owls, and sprites: if we obey them not, this will ensue: they'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.", "why prat'st thou to thyself and answer'st not? dromio thou, dromio thou snail, thou slug, thou sot.", "i am transformd, master, am i not?", "i think thou art in mind, and so am i.", "nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.", "thou hast thine own form.", "no, i am an ape.", "if thou art changed to aught, 'tis to an ass.", "'tis true. she rides me, and i long for grass. 'tis so. i am an ass; else it could never be but i should know her as well as she knows me.", "come, come, no longer will i be a fool, to put the finger in the eye and weep whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn. come, sir, to dinner. dromio, keep the gate. husband, i'll dine above with you today, and shrive you of a thousand idle pranks. sirrah, if any ask you for your master, say he dines forth, and let no creature enter. come, sister. dromio, play the porter well.", "am i in earth, in heaven, or in hell? sleeping or waking, mad or well-advised?"], ["known unto these, and to myself disguised! i'll say as they say, and persever so, and in this mist at all adventures go.", "master, shall i be porter at the gate?", "ay; and let none enter, lest i break your pate.", "come, come, antipholus, we dine too late."], ["good signior angelo, you must excuse us all; my wife is shrewish when i keep not hours. say that i lingered with you at your shop to see the making of her carcanet, and that tomorrow you will bring it home. but here's a villain that would face me down he met me on the mart, and that i beat him and charged him with a thousand marks in gold, and that i did deny my wife and house. thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?", "say what you will, sir, but i know what i know. that you beat me at the mart i have your hand to show; if the skin were parchment and the blows you gave were ink, your own handwriting would tell you what i think.", "i think thou art an ass.", "marry, so it doth appear by the wrongs i suffer and the blows i bear. i should kick being kicked; and, being at that pass, you would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.", "you're sad, signior balthasar. pray god our cheer may answer my good will and your good welcome here."], ["i hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your welcome dear.", "o signior balthasar, either at flesh or fish a table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.", "good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.", "and welcome more common, for that's nothing but words.", "small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.", "ay, to a niggardly host and more sparing guest. but though my cates be mean, take them in good part. better cheer may you have, but not with better heart. but soft! my door is lock'd. dromio go, bid them let us in.", "maud, bridget, marian, ciceley, gillian, ginn!", "mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch! either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch. dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call'st for such store when one is one too many? go, get thee from the door.", "what patch is made our porter? my master stays in the street.", "let him walk from whence he came, lest he catch cold on 's feet.", "who talks within there? ho, open the door."], ["right, sir, i'll tell you when an you tell me wherefore.", "wherefore? for my dinner. i have not dined today.", "nor today here you must not. come again when you may.", "what art thou that keep'st me out from the house i owe?", "the porter for this time, sir, and my name is dromio.", "o villain, thou hast stolen both mine office and my name! the one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame. if thou hadst been dromio today in my place, thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.", "what a coil is there, dromio! who are those at the gate?", "let my master in, luce.", "faith, no, he comes too late, and so tell your master.", "o lord, i must laugh. have at you with a proverb: shall i set in my staff?", "have at you with another: that's when, can you tell?"], ["if thy name be called \"luce,\" luce, thou hast answered him well.", "do you hear, you minion? you'll let us in, i hope?", "i thought to have asked you.", "and you said no.", "so, come, help. well struck! there was blow for blow.", "thou baggage, let me in.", "can you tell for whose sake?", "master, knock the door hard.", "let him knock till it ache.", "you'll cry for this, minion, if i beat the door down.", "what needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?", "who is that at the door that keeps all this noise?", "by my troth, your town is troubled with unruly boys.", "are you there, wife? you might have come before."], ["your wife, sir knave? go, get you from the door.", "if you went in pain, master, this knave would go sore.", "here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome. we would fain have either.", "in debating which was best, we shall part with neither.", "they stand at the door, master. bid them welcome hither.", "there is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.", "you would say so, master, if your garments were thin. your cake there is warm within; you stand here in the cold. it would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold.", "go, fetch me something: i'll break ope the gate.", "break any breaking here, and i'll break your knave's pate.", "a man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind, ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.", "it seems thou want'st breaking. out upon thee, hind!"], ["here's too much \"out upon thee!\" i pray thee, let me in.", "ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.", "well, i'll break in. go, borrow me a crow.", "a crow without feather? master, mean you so? for a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather. dromio of syracuse if a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow together.", "go, get thee gone. fetch me an iron crow.", "have patience, sir. o, let it not be so. herein you war against your reputation, and draw within the compass of suspect th' unviolated honor of your wife. once this: your long experience of her wisdom, her sober virtue, years, and modesty plead on her part some cause to you unknown. and doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse why at this time the doors are made against you. be ruled by me; depart in patience, and let us to the tiger all to dinner, and about evening come yourself alone to know the reason of this strange restraint. if by strong hand you offer to break in now in the stirring passage of the day, a vulgar comment will be made of it; and that supposd by the common rout against your yet ungalld estimation that may with foul intrusion enter in and dwell upon your grave when you are dead; for slander lives upon succession, forever housd where it gets possession."], ["you have prevailed. i will depart in quiet and, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry. i know a wench of excellent discourse, pretty and witty, wild and yet, too, gentle. there will we dine. this woman that i mean, my wife but, i protest, without desert hath oftentimes upbraided me withal; to her will we to dinner. angelo get you home and fetch the chain; by this i know 'tis made. bring it, i pray you, to the porpentine, for there's the house. that chain will i bestow be it for nothing but to spite my wife upon mine hostess there. good sir, make haste. since mine own doors refuse to entertain me, i'll knock elsewhere, to see if they'll disdain me.", "i'll meet you at that place some hour hence.", "do so. this jest shall cost me some expense."], ["and may it be that you have quite forgot a husband's office? shall, antipholus, even in the spring of love thy love-springs rot? shall love, in building, grow so ruinous? if you did wed my sister for her wealth, then for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness. or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth muffle your false love with some show of blindness. let not my sister read it in your eye; be not thy tongue thy own shame's orator; look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty; apparel vice like virtue's harbinger. bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted. teach sin the carriage of a holy saint. be secret-false. what need she be acquainted? what simple thief brags of his own attaint? 'tis double wrong to truant with your bed and let her read it in thy looks at board. shame hath a bastard fame, well managd; ill deeds is doubled with an evil word. alas, poor women, make us but believe, being compact of credit, that you love us. though others have the arm, show us the sleeve; we in your motion turn, and you may move us. then, gentle brother, get you in again. comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife. 'tis holy sport to be a little vain when the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.", "sweet mistress what your name is else i know not, nor by what wonder you do hit of mine,"], ["less in your knowledge and your grace you show not than our earth's wonder, more than earth divine. teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak. lay open to my earthy gross conceit, smothered in errors, feeble, shallow, weak, the folded meaning of your words' deceit. against my soul's pure truth why labour you to make it wander in an unknown field? are you a god? would you create me new? transform me, then, and to your power i'll yield. but if that i am i, then well i know your weeping sister is no wife of mine, nor to her bed no homage do i owe. far more, far more, to you do i decline. o, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note to drown me in thy sister's flood of tears. sing, siren, for thyself, and i will dote. spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs, and as a bed i'll take them and there lie, and in that glorious supposition think he gains by death that hath such means to die. let love, being light, be drownd if she sink.", "what, are you mad that you do reason so?", "not mad, but mated how, i do not know.", "it is a fault that springeth from your eye.", "for gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by."], ["gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.", "as good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.", "why call you me \"love\"? call my sister so.", "thy sister's sister.", "that's my sister.", "no, it is thyself, mine own self's better part, mine eye's clear eye, my dear heart's dearer heart, my food, my fortune, and my sweet hope's aim, my sole earth's heaven, and my heaven's claim.", "all this my sister is, or else should be.", "call thyself \"sister,\" sweet, for i am thee. thee will i love and with thee lead my life; thou hast no husband yet, nor i no wife. give me thy hand.", "o soft, sir! hold you still. i'll fetch my sister to get her goodwill.", "why, how now, dromio. where runn'st thou so fast?", "do you know me, sir? am i dromio? am i your man? am i myself?"], ["thou art dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.", "i am an ass, i am a woman's man, and besides myself.", "what woman's man? and how besides thyself?", "marry, sir, besides myself i am due to a woman, one that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.", "what claim lays she to thee?", "marry, sir, such claim as you would lay to your horse; and she would have me as a beast; not that i being a beast she would have me, but that she, being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.", "what is she?", "a very reverent body, ay, such a one as a man may not speak of without he say \"sir-reverence.\" i have but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a wondrous fat marriage.", "how dost thou mean a \"fat marriage\"?", "marry, sir, she's the kitchen wench, and all grease, and i know not what use to put her to but to make a lamp of her and run from her by her own light. i warrant her rags and the"], ["tallow in them will burn a poland winter. if she lives till doomsday, she'll burn a week longer than the whole world.", "what complexion is she of?", "swart like my shoe, but her face nothing like so clean kept. for why? she sweats. a man may go overshoes in the grime of it.", "that's a fault that water will mend.", "no, sir, 'tis in grain; noah's flood could not do it.", "what's her name?", "nell, sir, but her name and three quarters that's an ell and three quarters will not measure her from hip to hip.", "then she bears some breadth?", "no longer from head to foot than from hip to hip. she is spherical, like a globe. i could find out countries in her.", "in what part of her body stands ireland?", "marry, sir, in her buttocks. i found it out by the bogs.", "where scotland?"], ["i found it by the barrenness; hard in the palm of the hand.", "where france?", "in her forehead, armed and reverted, making war against her heir.", "where england?", "i looked for the chalky cliffs, but i could find no whiteness in them. but i guess it stood in her chin, by the salt rheum that ran between france and it.", "where spain?", "faith, i saw it not, but i felt it hot in her breath.", "where america, the indies?"], ["o, sir, upon her nose, all o'er-embellished with rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of spain, who sent whole armadas of caracks to be ballast at her nose.", "where stood belgia, the netherlands?", "o, sir, i did not look so low. to conclude: this drudge or diviner laid claim to me, call'd me dromio, swore i was assured to her, told me what privy marks i had about me, as the mark of my shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my left arm, that i, amazed, ran from her as a witch. and, i think, if my breast had not been made of faith, and my heart of steel, she had transformed me to a curtal dog and made me turn i' th' wheel.", "go, hie thee presently. post to the road. an if the wind blow any way from shore, i will not harbor in this town tonight. if any bark put forth, come to the mart, where i will walk till thou return to me. if every one knows us, and we know none, 'tis time, i think, to trudge, pack, and be gone.", "as from a bear a man would run for life, so fly i from her that would be my wife.", "there's none but witches do inhabit here, and therefore 'tis high time that i were hence. she that doth call me husband, even my soul doth for a wife abhor. but her fair sister, possessed with such a gentle sovereign grace,"], ["of such enchanting presence and discourse, hath almost made me traitor to myself. but lest myself be guilty to self wrong, i'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song.", "master antipholus.", "ay, that's my name.", "i know it well, sir. lo, here's the chain. i thought to have ta'en you at the porpentine; the chain unfinished made me stay thus long.", "what is your will that i shall do with this?", "what please yourself, sir. i have made it for you.", "made it for me, sir? i bespoke it not.", "not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have. go home with it and please your wife withal, and soon at supper time i'll visit you and then receive my money for the chain.", "i pray you, sir, receive the money now, for fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.", "you are a merry man, sir. fare you well.", "what i should think of this i cannot tell, but this i think: there's no man is so vain that would refuse so fair an offered chain."], ["i see a man here needs not live by shifts when in the streets he meets such golden gifts. i'll to the mart, and there for dromio stay. if any ship put out, then straight away."], ["you know since pentecost the sum is due, and since i have not much importuned you, nor now i had not, but that i am bound to persia, and want guilders for my voyage. therefore make present satisfaction, or i'll attach you by this officer.", "even just the sum that i do owe to you is growing to me by antipholus. and in the instant that i met with you, he had of me a chain. at five o'clock i shall receive the money for the same. pleaseth you walk with me down to his house, i will discharge my bond and thank you too.", "that labor may you save. see where he comes.", "while i go to the goldsmith's house, go thou and buy a rope's end. that will i bestow among my wife and her confederates for locking me out of my doors by day. but soft. i see the goldsmith. get thee gone. buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me."], ["i buy a thousand pound a year! i buy a rope!", "angelo a man is well holp up that trusts to you! i promisd your presence and the chain, but neither chain nor goldsmith came to me. belike you thought our love would last too long if it were chained together, and therefore came not.", "saving your merry humor, here's the note how much your chain weighs to the utmost carat, the fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion, which doth amount to three-odd ducats more than i stand debted to this gentleman. i pray you, see him presently discharged, for he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.", "i am not furnished with the present money. besides, i have some business in the town. good signior, take the stranger to my house, and with you take the chain, and bid my wife disburse the sum on the receipt thereof. perchance i will be there as soon as you.", "then you will bring the chain to her yourself.", "no, bear it with you lest i come not time enough.", "well, sir, i will. have you the chain about you?", "an if i have not, sir, i hope you have, or else you may return without your money."], ["nay, come, i pray you, sir, give me the chain. both wind and tide stays for this gentleman, and i, to blame, have held him here too long.", "good lord! you use this dalliance to excuse your breach of promise to the porpentine. i should have chid you for not bringing it, but, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.", "the hour steals on. i pray you, sir, dispatch.", "you hear how he importunes me. the chain!", "why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.", "come, come. you know i gave it you even now. either send the chain, or send me by some token.", "fie, now you run this humor out of breath. come, where's the chain? i pray you, let me see it.", "my business cannot brook this dalliance. antipholus good sir, say whe'er you'll answer me or no. if not, i'll leave him to the officer.", "i answer you? what should i answer you?", "the money that you owe me for the chain.", "i owe you none till i receive the chain.", "you know i gave it you half an hour since."], ["you gave me none. you wrong me much to say so.", "you wrong me more, sir, in denying it. consider how it stands upon my credit.", "well, officer, arrest him at my suit.", "i do, angelo and charge you in the duke's name to obey me.", "this touches me in reputation. either consent to pay this sum for me, or i attach you by this officer.", "consent to pay thee that i never had? arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou dar'st.", "here is thy fee. arrest him, officer. i would not spare my brother in this case if he should scorn me so apparently.", "i do arrest you, sir. you hear the suit.", "i do obey thee till i give thee bail. but, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear as all the metal in your shop will answer.", "sir, sir, i will have law in ephesus, to your notorious shame, i doubt it not."], ["master, there is a bark of epidamnum that stays but till her owner comes aboard, and then, sir, she bears away. our fraughtage, sir, i have conveyed aboard, and i have bought the oil, the balsamum and aqua vitae. the ship is in her trim; the merry wind blows fair from land. they stay for naught at all but for their owner, master, and yourself.", "how now? a madman? why, thou peevish sheep, what ship of epidamnum stays for me?", "a ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.", "thou drunken slave, i sent thee for a rope and told thee to what purpose and what end.", "you sent me for a rope's end as soon. you sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.", "i will debate this matter at more leisure and teach your ears to list me with more heed. to adriana, villain, hie thee straight. give her this key, and tell her in the desk that's cover'd o'er with turkish tapestry there is a purse of ducats. let her send it. tell her i am arrested in the street, and that shall bail me. hie thee, slave. begone. on, officer, to prison till it come."], ["to adriana. that is where we dined, where dowsabel did claim me for her husband. she is too big, i hope, for me to compass. thither i must, although against my will, for servants must their masters' minds fulfill."], ["ah, luciana, did he tempt thee so? mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye that he did plead in earnest, yea or no? looked he or red or pale, or sad or merrily? what observation mad'st thou in this case of his heart's meteors tilting in his face?", "first he denied you had in him no right.", "he meant he did me none; the more my spite.", "then swore he that he was a stranger here.", "and true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.", "then pleaded i for you.", "and what said he?", "that love i begged for you he begged of me.", "with what persuasion did he tempt thy love?", "with words that in an honest suit might move. first he did praise my beauty, then my speech.", "did'st speak him fair?"], ["have patience, i beseech.", "i cannot, nor i will not hold me still; my tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will. he is deformd, crooked, old, and sere, ill-faced, worse-bodied, shapeless everywhere, vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind, stigmatical in making, worse in mind.", "who would be jealous, then, of such a one? no evil lost is wailed when it is gone.", "ah, but i think him better than i say, and yet would herein others' eyes were worse. far from her nest the lapwing cries away. my heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.", "here, go the desk, the purse! sweet, now make haste.", "how hast thou lost thy breath?", "by running fast.", "where is thy master, dromio? is he well?", "no, he's in tartar limbo, worse than hell. a devil in an everlasting garment hath him, one whose hard heart is buttoned up with steel; a fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough; a wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff; a back-friend, a shoulder clapper, one that countermands"], ["the passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands; a hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well, one that before the judgment carries poor souls to hell.", "why, man, what is the matter?", "i do not know the matter. he is 'rested on the case.", "what, is he arrested? tell me at whose suit.", "i know not at whose suit he is arrested well, but he's in a suit of buff which 'rested him; that can i tell. will you send him, mistress, redemption the money in his desk?", "go fetch it, sister.", "this i wonder at, that he, unknown to me, should be in debt. tell me, was he arrested on a band?", "not on a band, but on a stronger thing: a chain, a chain. do you not hear it ring?", "what, the chain?", "no, no, the bell. 'tis time that i were gone. it was two ere i left him, and now the clock strikes one.", "the hours come back. that did i never hear.", "o yes, if any hour meet a sergeant, he turns back for very fear."], ["as if time were in debt. how fondly dost thou reason!", "time is a very bankrout and owes more than he's worth to season. nay, he's a thief too. have you not heard men say that time comes stealing on by night and day? if he be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way, hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?", "go, dromio. there's the money. bear it straight, and bring thy master home immediately. come, sister, i am pressed down with conceit: conceit, my comfort and my injury."], ["there's not a man i meet but doth salute me as if i were their well-acquainted friend, and every one doth call me by my name. some tender money to me; some invite me; some other give me thanks for kindnesses; some offer me commodities to buy. even now a tailor called me in his shop and showed me silks that he had bought for me, and therewithal took measure of my body. sure, these are but imaginary wiles, and lapland sorcerers inhabit here.", "master, here's the gold you sent me for. what, have you got the picture of old adam new-appareled?", "what gold is this? what adam dost thou mean?", "not that adam that kept the paradise, but that adam that keeps the prison; he that goes in the calf's skin that was killed for the prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you forsake your liberty.", "i understand thee not."], ["no? why, 'tis a plain case: he that went, like a bass viol in a case of leather; the man, sir, that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob and 'rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men and gives them suits of durance; he that sets up his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a morris-pike.", "what, thou meanest an officer?", "ay, sir, the sergeant of the band; he that brings any man to answer it that breaks his band; one that thinks a man always going to bed and says \"god give you good rest.\"", "well, sir, there rest in your foolery. is there any ships put forth tonight? may we be gone?", "why, sir, i brought you word an hour since that the bark put forth tonight, and then were you hindered by the sergeant to tarry for the hoy . here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.", "the fellow is distract, and so am i, and here we wander in illusions. some blessed power deliver us from hence!", "well met, well met, master antipholus. i see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now. is that the chain you promised me today?", "satan, avoid! i charge thee, tempt me not.", "master, is this mistress satan?"], ["it is the devil.", "nay, she is worse; she is the devil's dam, and here she comes in the habit of a light wench. and thereof comes that the wenches say \"god damn me\" that's as much to say \"god make me a light wench.\" it is written they appear to men like angels of light. light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn: ergo, light wenches will burn. come not near her.", "your man and you are marvelous merry, sir. will you go with me? we'll mend our dinner here.", "master, if you do, expect spoon meat; or bespeak a long spoon.", "why, dromio?", "marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.", "( courtesan) avoid then, fiend! what tell'st thou me of supping? thou art, as you are all, a sorceress. i conjure thee to leave me and be gone.", "give me the ring of mine you had at dinner or, for my diamond, the chain you promised, and i'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you."], ["some devils ask but the parings of one's nail, a rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a nut, a cherrystone; but she, more covetous, would have a chain. master, be wise. an if you give it her, the devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.", "i pray you, sir, my ring or else the chain. i hope you do not mean to cheat me so.", "avaunt, thou witch! come, dromio, let us go.", "\"fly pride,\" says the peacock. mistress, that you know.", "now, out of doubt antipholus is mad; else would he never so demean himself. a ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats, and for the same he promised me a chain. both one and other he denies me now. the reason that i gather he is mad, besides this present instance of his rage, is a mad tale he told today at dinner of his own doors being shut against his entrance. belike his wife, acquainted with his fits, on purpose shut the doors against his way. my way is now to hie home to his house and tell his wife that, being lunatic, he rushed into my house and took perforce my ring away. this course i fittest choose, for forty ducats is too much to lose."], ["fear me not, man. i will not break away: i'll give thee, ere i leave thee, so much money, to warrant thee, as i am 'rested for. my wife is in a wayward mood today and will not lightly trust the messenger that i should be attached in ephesus. i tell you, 'twill sound harshly in her ears.", "here comes my man. i think he brings the money. how now, sir? have you that i sent you for?", "here's that, i warrant you, will pay them all.", "but where's the money?", "why, sir, i gave the money for the rope.", "five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?", "i'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.", "to what end did i bid thee hie thee home?", "to a rope's end, sir, and to that end am i returned.", "and to that end, sir, i will welcome you. dromio of ephesus"], ["good sir, be patient.", "nay, 'tis for me to be patient. i am in adversity.", "good now, hold thy tongue.", "nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.", "thou whoreson, senseless villain.", "i would i were senseless, sir, that i might not feel your blows.", "thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an ass.", "i am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long ears. i have served him from the hour of my nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for my service but blows. when i am cold, he heats me with beating; when i am warm, he cools me with beating. i am waked with it when i sleep, raised with it when i sit, driven out of doors with it when i go from home, welcomed home with it when i return. nay, i bear it on my shoulders as a beggar wont her brat, and i think when he hath lamed me, i shall beg with it from door to door.", "come, go along. my wife is coming yonder."], ["mistress, respect your end, or rather, the prophecy like the parrot, \"beware the rope's end.\"", "wilt thou still talk? dromio of ephesus", "how say you now? is not your husband mad?", "his incivility confirms no less. good doctor pinch, you are a conjurer; establish him in his true sense again, and i will please you what you will demand.", "alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!", "mark how he trembles in his ecstasy.", "give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.", "there is my hand, and let it feel your ear. pinch", "i charge thee, satan, housed within this man, to yield possession to my holy prayers and to thy state of darkness hie thee straight. i conjure thee by all the saints in heaven.", "peace, doting wizard, peace. i am not mad.", "o, that thou wert not, poor distressd soul!", "you minion, you, are these your customers? did this companion with the saffron face revel and feast it at my house today whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut and i denied to enter in my house?"], ["o husband, god doth know you dined at home, where would you had remained until this time, free from these slanders and this open shame.", "\"dined at home\"? thou villain, what sayest thou?", "sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.", "were not my doors locked up and i shut out?", "perdie, your doors were locked, and you shut out.", "and did not she herself revile me there?", "sans fable, she herself reviled you there.", "did not her kitchen maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?", "certes, she did; the kitchen vestal scorned you.", "and did not i in rage depart from thence?", "in verity you did. my bones bear witness, that since have felt the vigour of his rage.", "pinch is't good to soothe him in these contraries?", "it is no shame. the fellow finds his vein and, yielding to him, humors well his frenzy.", "adriana thou hast suborned the goldsmith to arrest me."], ["alas, i sent you money to redeem you by dromio here, who came in haste for it.", "money by me! heart and goodwill you might, but surely, master, not a rag of money.", "went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?", "he came to me, and i delivered it.", "and i am witness with her that she did.", "god and the rope-maker bear me witness that i was sent for nothing but a rope.", "mistress, both man and master is possessed. i know it by their pale and deadly looks. they must be bound and laid in some dark room.", "adriana say wherefore didst thou lock me forth today. dromio of ephesus and why dost thou deny the bag of gold?", "i did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.", "and, gentle master, i received no gold. but i confess, sir, that we were locked out.", "dissembling villain, thou speak'st false in both.", "dissembling harlot, thou art false in all, and art confederate with a damnd pack to make a loathsome abject scorn of me. but with these nails i'll pluck out these false eyes that would behold in me this shameful sport."], ["o bind him, bind him! let him not come near me.", "more company! the fiend is strong within him.", "ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!", "what, will you murder me? thou jailer, thou, i am thy prisoner. wilt thou suffer them to make a rescue?", "masters, let him go. he is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.", "go, bind this man, for he is frantic too.", "what wilt thou do, thou peevish officer? hast thou delight to see a wretched man do outrage and displeasure to himself?", "he is my prisoner. if i let him go, the debt he owes will be required of me.", "i will discharge thee ere i go from thee. bear me forthwith unto his creditor, and, knowing how the debt grows, i will pay it. good master doctor, see him safe conveyed home to my house. o most unhappy day!"], ["o most unhappy strumpet!", "master, i am here entered in bond for you.", "out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me?", "will you be bound for nothing? be mad, good master. cry \"the devil!\"", "god help poor souls! how idly do they talk!", "go bear him hence sister, go you with me.", "say now whose suit is he arrested at.", "one angelo, a goldsmith. do you know him?", "i know the man. what is the sum he owes?", "two hundred ducats.", "say, how grows it due?", "due for a chain your husband had of him.", "he did bespeak a chain for me but had it not."], ["whenas your husband all in rage today came to my house and took away my ring, the ring i saw upon his finger now, straight after did i meet him with a chain.", "it may be so, but i did never see it. come, jailer, bring me where the goldsmith is. i long to know the truth hereof at large.", "god for thy mercy, they are loose again!", "and come with naked swords. let's call more help to have them bound again.", "away! they'll kill us.", "i see these witches are afraid of swords.", "she that would be your wife now ran from you.", "come to the centaur. fetch our stuff from thence. i long that we were safe and sound aboard.", "faith, stay here this night. they will surely do us no harm. you saw they speak us fair, give us gold. methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for the mountain of mad flesh"], ["that claims marriage of me, i could find in my heart to stay here still, and turn witch.", "i will not stay tonight for all the town. therefore away, to get our stuff aboard."], ["i am sorry, sir, that i have hindered you, but i protest he had the chain of me, though most dishonestly he doth deny it.", "how is the man esteemed here in the city?", "of very reverend reputation, sir, of credit infinite, highly beloved, second to none that lives here in the city. his word might bear my wealth at any time.", "speak softly. yonder, as i think, he walks.", "'tis so; and that self chain about his neck which he forswore most monstrously to have. good sir, draw near to me. i'll speak to him. signior antipholus, i wonder much that you would put me to this shame and trouble, and not without some scandal to yourself, with circumstance and oaths so to deny this chain, which now you wear so openly. beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment, you have done wrong to this my honest friend, who, but for staying on our controversy, had hoisted sail and put to sea today. this chain you had of me. can you deny it?"], ["i think i had. i never did deny it.", "yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.", "who heard me to deny it or forswear it?", "these ears of mine, thou know'st did hear thee. fie on thee, wretch. 'tis pity that thou liv'st to walk where any honest men resort.", "thou art a villain to impeach me thus. i'll prove mine honor and mine honesty against thee presently if thou dar'st stand.", "i dare, and do defy thee for a villain.", "hold, hurt him not, for god's sake. he is mad. some get within him; take his sword away. bind dromio too, and bear them to my house!", "run, master, run. for god's sake, take a house. this is some priory. in, or we are spoiled."], ["be quiet, people. wherefore throng you hither?", "to fetch my poor distracted husband hence. let us come in, that we may bind him fast and bear him home for his recovery.", "i knew he was not in his perfect wits.", "i am sorry now that i did draw on him.", "how long hath this possession held the man?", "this week he hath been heavy, sour, sad, and much different from the man he was. but till this afternoon his passion ne'er brake into extremity of rage.", "hath he not lost much wealth by wrack of sea? buried some dear friend? hath not else his eye stray'd his affection in unlawful love, a sin prevailing much in youthful men who give their eyes the liberty of gazing? which of these sorrows is he subject to?", "to none of these, except it be the last, namely, some love that drew him oft from home.", "you should for that have reprehended him.", "why, so i did.", "ay, but not rough enough."], ["as roughly as my modesty would let me.", "haply in private.", "and in assemblies too.", "ay, but not enough.", "it was the copy of our conference. in bed he slept not for my urging it; at board he fed not for my urging it. alone, it was the subject of my theme; in company i often glancd it. still did i tell him it was vile and bad.", "and thereof came it that the man was mad. the venom clamors of a jealous woman poisons more deadly than a mad dog's tooth. it seems his sleeps were hinder'd by thy railing, and therefore comes it that his head is light. thou sayst his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings. unquiet meals make ill digestions. thereof the raging fire of fever bred, and what's a fever but a fit of madness? thou sayest his sports were hinderd by thy brawls. sweet recreation barred, what doth ensue but moody and dull melancholy, kinsman to grim and comfortless despair, and at her heels a huge infectious troop of pale distemperatures and foes to life? in food, in sport, and life-preserving rest to be disturbed, would mad or man or beast. the consequence is, then, thy jealous fits have scared thy husband from the use of wits."], ["she never reprehended him but mildly when he demeaned himself rough, rude, and wildly. adriana why bear you these rebukes and answer not?", "she did betray me to my own reproof. good people, enter and lay hold on him.", "no, not a creature enters in my house.", "then let your servants bring my husband forth.", "neither: he took this place for sanctuary, and it shall privilege him from your hands till i have brought him to his wits again or lose my labor in assaying it.", "i will attend my husband, be his nurse, diet his sickness, for it is my office and will have no attorney but myself; and therefore let me have him home with me.", "be patient, for i will not let him stir till i have used the approvd means i have, with wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers, to make of him a formal man again. it is a branch and parcel of mine oath, a charitable duty of my order. therefore depart and leave him here with me.", "i will not hence and leave my husband here; and ill it doth beseem your holiness to separate the husband and the wife."], ["be quiet and depart. thou shalt not have him.", "complain unto the duke of this indignity.", "come, go. i will fall prostrate at his feet and never rise until my tears and prayers have won his grace to come in person hither and take perforce my husband from the abbess.", "by this, i think, the dial points at five. anon, i'm sure, the duke himself in person comes this way to the melancholy vale, the place of death and sorry execution behind the ditches of the abbey here.", "upon what cause?", "to see a reverend syracusian merchant, who put unluckily into this bay against the laws and statutes of this town, beheaded publicly for his offense.", "see where they come. we will behold his death.", "kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey.", "yet once again proclaim it publicly, if any friend will pay the sum for him, he shall not die; so much we tender him."], ["justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess.", "she is a virtuous and a reverend lady. it cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.", "may it please your grace, antipholus my husband, whom i made lord of me and all i had at your important letters, this ill day a most outrageous fit of madness took him, that desp'rately he hurried through the street, with him his bondman, all as mad as he, doing displeasure to the citizens by rushing in their houses, bearing thence rings, jewels, any thing his rage did like. once did i get him bound and sent him home whilst to take order for the wrongs i went that here and there his fury had committed. anon, i wot not by what strong escape, he broke from those that had the guard of him, and with his mad attendant and himself, each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords, met us again and, madly bent on us, chased us away, till, raising of more aid, we came again to bind them. then they fled into this abbey, whither we pursued them, and here the abbess shuts the gates on us and will not suffer us to fetch him out, nor send him forth that we may bear him hence. therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.", "long since thy husband served me in my wars, and i to thee engaged a prince's word, when thou didst make him master of thy bed, to do him all the grace and good i could."], ["go, some of you, knock at the abbey gate, and bid the lady abbess come to me. i will determine this before i stir.", "o mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself. my master and his man are both broke loose, beaten the maids a-row, and bound the doctor, whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire, and ever as it blazed, they threw on him great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair. my master preaches patience to him, and the while his man with scissors nicks him like a fool; and sure, unless you send some present help, between them they will kill the conjurer.", "peace, fool. thy master and his man are here, and that is false thou dost report to us.", "mistress, upon my life i tell you true. i have not breathed almost since i did see it. he cries for you, and vows, if he can take you, to scorch your face and to disfigure you.", "hark, hark, i hear him, mistress. fly, begone!", "come, stand by me. fear nothing. guard with halberds."], ["ay me, it is my husband. witness you that he is borne about invisible. even now we housed him in the abbey here, and now he's there, past thought of human reason.", "justice, most gracious duke, o, grant me justice, even for the service that long since i did thee when i bestrid thee in the wars and took deep scars to save thy life. even for the blood that then i lost for thee, now grant me justice.", "unless the fear of death doth make me dote, i see my son antipholus and dromio.", "justice, sweet prince, against that woman there, she whom thou gav'st to me to be my wife, that hath abusd and dishonored me even in the strength and height of injury. beyond imagination is the wrong that she this day hath shameless thrown on me.", "discover how, and thou shalt find me just.", "this day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me while she with harlots feasted in my house.", "a grievous fault. say, woman, didst thou so?", "no, my good lord. myself, he, and my sister today did dine together. so befall my soul as this is false he burdens me withal.", "ne'er may i look on day, nor sleep on night but she tells to your highness simple truth."], ["o perjured woman! they are both forsworn. in this the madman justly chargeth them.", "my liege, i am advisd what i say, neither disturbed with the effect of wine, nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire, albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad. this woman locked me out this day from dinner. that goldsmith there, were he not packed with her, could witness it, for he was with me then, who parted with me to go fetch a chain, promising to bring it to the porpentine, where balthasar and i did dine together. our dinner done and he not coming thither, i went to seek him. in the street i met him, and in his company that gentleman. second merchant there did this perjured goldsmith swear me down that i this day of him received the chain, which, god he knows, i saw not; for the which he did arrest me with an officer. i did obey, and sent my peasant home for certain ducats. he with none returned. then fairly i bespoke the officer to go in person with me to my house. by th' way we met my wife, her sister, and a rabble more of vile confederates. along with them they brought one pinch, a hungry, lean-faced villain, a mere anatomy, a mountebank, a threadbare juggler, and a fortune-teller, a needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch, a living dead man. this pernicious slave, forsooth, took on him as a conjurer, and, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,"], ["and with no face (as 'twere) outfacing me, cries out i was possessed. then all together they fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence, and in a dark and dankish vault at home there left me and my man, both bound together, till gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder, i gained my freedom and immediately ran hither to your grace, whom i beseech to give me ample satisfaction for these deep shames and great indignities.", "my lord, in truth, thus far i witness with him: that he dined not at home, but was locked out.", "but had he such a chain of thee or no?", "he had, my lord, and when he ran in here, these people saw the chain about his neck.", "besides, i will be sworn these ears of mine heard you confess you had the chain of him after you first forswore it on the mart, and thereupon i drew my sword on you, and then you fled into this abbey here, from whence i think you are come by miracle.", "i never came within these abbey walls, nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me. i never saw the chain, so help me heaven, and this is false you burden me withal.", "why, what an intricate impeach is this! i think you all have drunk of circe's cup. if here you housed him, here he would have been. adriana if he were mad, he would not plead so coldly."], ["you say he dined at home; the goldsmith here denies that saying. sirrah, what say you?", "sir, he dined with her there, at the porpentine.", "he did, and from my finger snatched that ring.", "'tis true, my liege; this ring i had of her.", "saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here?", "as sure, my liege, as i do see your grace.", "why, this is strange. go call the abbess hither. i think you are all mated or stark mad.", "most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word. haply i see a friend will save my life and pay the sum that may deliver me.", "speak freely, syracusian, what thou wilt.", "antipholus of ephesus is not your name, sir, called antipholus? and is not that your bondman dromio?", "within this hour i was his bondman sir, but he, i thank him, gnawed in two my cords. now am i dromio, and his man, unbound.", "i am sure you both of you remember me.", "ourselves we do remember, sir, by you. for lately we were bound as you are now. you are not pinch's patient, are you, sir?"], ["why look you strange on me? you know me well.", "i never saw you in my life till now.", "o, grief hath changed me since you saw me last, and careful hours with time's deformd hand have written strange defeatures in my face. but tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?", "neither.", "dromio, nor thou?", "no, trust me, sir, nor i.", "i am sure thou dost.", "ay, sir, but i am sure i do not, and whatsoever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him.", "not know my voice! o time's extremity, hast thou so crack'd and splitted my poor tongue in seven short years that here my only son knows not my feeble key of untuned cares? though now this graind face of mine be hid in sap-consuming winter's drizzled snow, and all the conduits of my blood froze up, yet hath my night of life some memory, my wasting lamps some fading glimmer left, my dull deaf ears a little use to hear. all these old witnesses i cannot err tell me thou art my son antipholus."], ["i never saw my father in my life.", "but seven years since, in syracusa, boy, thou know'st we parted. but perhaps, my son, thou sham'st to acknowledge me in misery.", "the duke and all that know me in the city can witness with me that it is not so i ne'er saw syracusa in my life.", "i tell thee, syracusian, twenty years have i been patron to antipholus, during which time he ne'er saw syracusa. i see thy age and dangers make thee dote.", "most mighty duke, behold a man much wronged.", "i see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.", "antipholus one of these men is genius to the other. dromio and so, of these, which is the natural man and which the spirit? who deciphers them?", "i, sir, am dromio. command him away."], ["i, sir, am dromio. please, let me stay.", "egeon art thou not, or else his ghost?", "o, my old master. who hath bound him here?", "whoever bound him, i will loose his bonds and gain a husband by his liberty. speak, old egeon, if thou be'st the man that hadst a wife once called emilia, that bore thee at a burden two fair sons. o, if thou be'st the same egeon, speak, and speak unto the same emilia.", "why, here begins his morning story right; these two antipholuses, these two so like, and these two dromios, one in semblance besides her urging of her wreck at sea these are the parents to these children, which accidentally are met together.", "if i dream not, thou art emilia. if thou art she, tell me where is that son that floated with thee on the fatal raft?", "by men of epidamnum he and i and the twin dromio all were taken up; but by and by rude fishermen of corinth by force took dromio and my son from them and me they left with those of epidamnum. what then became of them i cannot tell; i to this fortune that you see me in.", "antipholus of syracuse antipholus, thou cam'st from corinth first."], ["no, sir, not i. i came from syracuse.", "stay, stand apart. i know not which is which.", "i came from corinth, my most gracious lord.", "and i with him.", "brought to this town by that most famous warrior duke menaphon, your most renownd uncle.", "which of you two did dine with me today?", "i, gentle mistress.", "and are not you my husband?", "no, i say nay to that.", "and so do i, yet did she call me so, and this fair gentlewoman, her sister here, did call me brother. luciana what i told you then i hope i shall have leisure to make good, if this be not a dream i see and hear.", "that is the chain, sir, which you had of me.", "i think it be, sir. i deny it not.", "and you, sir, for this chain arrested me.", "i think i did, sir. i deny it not."], ["i sent you money, sir, to be your bail by dromio, but i think he brought it not.", "no, none by me.", "this purse of ducats i received from you, and dromio my man did bring them me. i see we still did meet each other's man, and i was ta'en for him, and he for me, and thereupon these errors are arose.", "these ducats pawn i for my father here.", "it shall not need. thy father hath his life.", "sir, i must have that diamond from you.", "there, take it; and much thanks for my good cheer.", "renownd duke, vouchsafe to take the pains to go with us into the abbey here and hear at large discoursed all our fortunes, and all that are assembled in this place that by this sympathizd one day's error have suffered wrong. go, keep us company, and we shall make full satisfaction. thirty-three years have i but gone in travail of you, my sons, and till this present hour my heavy burden ne'er deliverd. the duke, my husband, and my children both, and you, the calendars of their nativity, go to a gossips' feast, and go with me. after so long grief, such nativity!", "with all my heart i'll gossip at this feast."], ["antipholus of ephesus master, shall i fetch your stuff from shipboard?", "dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embarked?", "your goods that lay at host, sir, in the centaur.", "he speaks to me. i am your master, dromio. come, go with us. we'll look to that anon. embrace thy brother there. rejoice with him.", "there is a fat friend at your master's house that kitchened me for you today at dinner. she now shall be my sister, not my wife.", "methinks you are my glass, and not my brother: i see by you i am a sweet-faced youth. will you walk in to see their gossiping?", "not i, sir. you are my elder.", "that's a question. how shall we try it?", "we'll draw cuts for the signior. till then, lead thou first.", "nay, then, thus: we came into the world like brother and brother, and now let's go hand in hand, not one before another."]], [["who's there?", "nay, answer me. stand and unfold yourself.", "long live the king!", "barnardo?", "he.", "you come most carefully upon your hour.", "'tis now struck twelve. get thee to bed, francisco.", "for this relief much thanks. 'tis bitter cold, and i am sick at heart.", "have you had quiet guard?", "not a mouse stirring.", "well, good night. if you do meet horatio and marcellus, the rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.", "i think i hear them. stand, ho! who's there?"], ["friends to this ground.", "and liegemen to the dane.", "give you good night.", "o, farewell, honest soldier. who hath relieved you?", "barnardo has my place. give you good night.", "holla, barnardo.", "say what, is horatio there?", "a piece of him.", "welcome, horatio. welcome, good marcellus.", "what, has this thing appeared again tonight?", "i have seen nothing.", "horatio says 'tis but our fantasy and will not let belief take hold of him touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us. therefore i have entreated him along with us to watch the minutes of this night, that if again this apparition come he may approve our eyes and speak to it.", "tush, tush, 'twill not appear."], ["sit down a while and let us once again assail your ears, that are so fortified against our story, what we have two nights seen.", "well, sit we down, and let us hear barnardo speak of this.", "last night of all, when yond same star that's westward from the pole had made his course t' illume that part of heaven where now it burns, marcellus and myself, the bell then beating one", "peace, break thee off. look where it comes again!", "in the same figure like the king that's dead.", "horatio thou art a scholar. speak to it, horatio.", "looks it not like the king? mark it, horatio.", "most like. it harrows me with fear and wonder.", "it would be spoke to.", "question it, horatio.", "what art thou that usurp'st this time of night together with that fair and warlike form in which the majesty of buried denmark did sometimes march? by heaven, i charge thee, speak."], ["it is offended.", "see, it stalks away.", "stay! speak, speak! i charge thee, speak!", "'tis gone and will not answer.", "how now, horatio? you tremble and look pale. is not this something more than fantasy? what think you on 't?", "before my god, i might not this believe without the sensible and true avouch of mine own eyes.", "is it not like the king?", "as thou art to thyself. such was the very armour he had on when he the ambitious norway combated. so frowned he once when, in an angry parle, he smote the sledded polacks on the ice. 'tis strange.", "thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, with martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.", "in what particular thought to work i know not, but in the gross and scope of mine opinion this bodes some strange eruption to our state."], ["good now, sit down and tell me, he that knows, why this same strict and most observant watch so nightly toils the subject of the land, and why such daily cast of brazen cannon and foreign mart for implements of war, why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task does not divide the sunday from the week. what might be toward, that this sweaty haste doth make the night joint laborer with the day? who is 't that can inform me?", "that can i. at least, the whisper goes so: our last king, whose image even but now appeared to us, was, as you know, by fortinbras of norway, thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride, dared to the combat; in which our valiant hamlet (for so this side of our known world esteemed him) did slay this fortinbras, who by a sealed compact well ratified by law and heraldry, did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands which he stood seized of to the conqueror, against the which a moiety competent was gagd by our king, which had returned to the inheritance of fortinbras had he been vanquisher, as, by the same covenant and carriage of the article designed, his fell to hamlet. now, sir, young fortinbras, of unimprovd mettle hot and full, hath in the skirts of norway here and there sharked up a list of lawless resolutes, for food and diet, to some enterprise that hath a stomach in 't, which is no other as it doth well appear unto our state but to recover of us, by strong hand"], ["and terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands so by his father lost. and this, i take it, is the main motive of our preparations, the source of this our watch, and the chief head of this posthaste and rummage in the land.", "i think it be no other but e'en so. well may it sort that this portentous figure comes armd through our watch so like the king that was and is the question of these wars.", "a mote it is to trouble the mind's eye. in the most high and palmy state of rome, a little ere the mightiest julius fell, the graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead did squeak and gibber in the roman streets as stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, disasters in the sun, and the moist star upon whose influence neptune's empire stands was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. and even the like precurse of feared events, as harbingers preceding still the fates and prologue to the omen coming on, have heaven and earth together demonstrated unto our climatures and countrymen.", "but soft, behold! lo, where it comes again. i'll cross it though it blast me. stay, illusion!", "if thou hast any sound or use of voice, speak to me."], ["if there be any good thing to be done that may to thee do ease and grace to me, speak to me. if thou art privy to thy country's fate, which happily foreknowing may avoid, oh, speak! or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life extorted treasure in the womb of earth, for which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, speak of it. stay and speak!", "stop it, marcellus.", "shall i strike at it with my partisan?", "do, if it will not stand.", "'tis here.", "'tis here.", "'tis gone. we do it wrong, being so majestical, to offer it the show of violence, for it is, as the air, invulnerable, and our vain blows malicious mockery.", "it was about to speak when the cock crew."], ["and then it started like a guilty thing upon a fearful summons. i have heard the cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat awake the god of day, and, at his warning, whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, th' extravagant and erring spirit hies to his confine, and of the truth herein this present object made probation.", "it faded on the crowing of the cock. some say that ever 'gainst that season comes wherein our saviour's birth is celebrated, the bird of dawning singeth all night long. and then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad. the nights are wholesome. then no planets strike, no fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm, so hallowed and so gracious is that time.", "so have i heard and do in part believe it. but look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill. break we our watch up, and by my advice, let us impart what we have seen tonight unto young hamlet, for, upon my life, this spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, as needful in our loves, fitting our duty?", "let's do 't, i pray, and i this morning know where we shall find him most conveniently."], ["though yet of hamlet our dear brother's death the memory be green, and that it us befitted to bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom to be contracted in one brow of woe, yet so far hath discretion fought with nature that we with wisest sorrow think on him together with remembrance of ourselves. therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, th' imperial jointress to this warlike state, have we as 'twere with a defeated joy, with an auspicious and a dropping eye, with mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, in equal scale weighing delight and dole taken to wife. nor have we herein barred your better wisdoms, which have freely gone with this affair along. for all, our thanks. now follows that you know. young fortinbras, holding a weak supposal of our worth or thinking by our late dear brother's death our state to be disjoint and out of frame, colleagud with the dream of his advantage, he hath not failed to pester us with message importing the surrender of those lands lost by his father, with all bonds of law, to our most valiant brother. so much for him.", "now for ourself and for this time of meeting"], ["thus much the business is: we have here writ to norway, uncle of young fortinbras who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears of this his nephew's purpose to suppress his further gait herein, in that the levies, the lists, and full proportions are all made out of his subject; and we here dispatch you, good cornelius, and you, voltemand, for bearers of this greeting to old norway, giving to you no further personal power to business with the king more than the scope of these dilated articles allow. ( farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.", "in that and all things will we show our duty.", "we doubt it nothing. heartily farewell.", "and now, laertes, what's the news with you? you told us of some suit. what is 't, laertes? you cannot speak of reason to the dane and lose your voice. what wouldst thou beg, laertes, that shall not be my offer, not thy asking? the head is not more native to the heart, the hand more instrumental to the mouth, than is the throne of denmark to thy father. what wouldst thou have, laertes?", "my dread lord, your leave and favor to return to france, from whence though willingly i came to denmark to show my duty in your coronation, yet now, i must confess, that duty done, my thoughts and wishes bend again toward france and bow them to your gracious leave and pardon."], ["have you your father's leave? what says polonius?", "he hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave by laborsome petition, and at last upon his will i sealed my hard consent. i do beseech you, give him leave to go.", "take thy fair hour, laertes. time be thine, and thy best graces spend it at thy will. but now, my cousin hamlet, and my son", "a little more than kin and less than kind.", "how is it that the clouds still hang on you?", "not so, my lord. i am too much i' the sun.", "good hamlet, cast thy nighted color off, and let thine eye look like a friend on denmark. do not forever with thy vaild lids seek for thy noble father in the dust. thou know'st 'tis common. all that lives must die, passing through nature to eternity.", "ay, madam, it is common.", "if it be, why seems it so particular with thee?"], ["\"seems,\" madam? nay, it is. i know not \"seems.\" 'tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, nor customary suits of solemn black, nor windy suspiration of forced breath, no, nor the fruitful river in the eye, nor the dejected 'havior of the visage, together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, that can denote me truly. these indeed \"seem,\" for they are actions that a man might play. but i have that within which passeth show, these but the trappings and the suits of woe.", "'tis sweet and commendable in your nature, hamlet, to give these mourning duties to your father. but you must know your father lost a father, that father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound in filial obligation for some term to do obsequious sorrow. but to persever in obstinate condolement is a course of impious stubbornness. 'tis unmanly grief. it shows a will most incorrect to heaven, a heart unfortified, a mind impatient, an understanding simple and unschooled. for what we know must be and is as common as any the most vulgar thing to sense, why should we in our peevish opposition take it to heart? fie! 'tis a fault to heaven, a fault against the dead, a fault to nature, to reason most absurd, whose common theme is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, from the first corse till he that died today, \"this must be so.\" we pray you, throw to earth this unprevailing woe, and think of us as of a father. for let the world take note, you are the most immediate to our throne,"], ["and with no less nobility of love than that which dearest father bears his son do i impart toward you. for your intent in going back to school in wittenberg, it is most retrograde to our desire. and we beseech you, bend you to remain here in the cheer and comfort of our eye, our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.", "let not thy mother lose her prayers, hamlet. i pray thee, stay with us. go not to wittenberg.", "i shall in all my best obey you, madam.", "why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply. be as ourself in denmark. madam, come. this gentle and unforced accord of hamlet sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof no jocund health that denmark drinks today but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, and the king's rouse the heavens shall bruit again, respeaking earthly thunder. come away.", "oh, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt, thaw, and resolve itself into a dew, or that the everlasting had not fixed his canon 'gainst self-slaughter! o god, god! how weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable seem to me all the uses of this world! fie on 't, ah fie! 'tis an unweeded garden that grows to seed. things rank and gross in nature possess it merely. that it should come to this. but two months dead nay, not so much, not two. so excellent a king, that was to this hyperion to a satyr. so loving to my mother"], ["that he might not beteem the winds of heaven visit her face too roughly. heaven and earth, must i remember? why, she would hang on him as if increase of appetite had grown by what it fed on, and yet, within a month let me not think on 't. frailty, thy name is woman! a little month, or ere those shoes were old with which she followed my poor father's body, like niobe, all tears. why she, even she o god, a beast that wants discourse of reason would have mourned longer! married with my uncle, my father's brother, but no more like my father than i to hercules. within a month, ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears had left the flushing in her galld eyes, she married. o most wicked speed, to post with such dexterity to incestuous sheets! it is not nor it cannot come to good, but break, my heart, for i must hold my tongue.", "hail to your lordship.", "i am glad to see you well. horatio? or i do forget myself?", "the same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.", "sir, my good friend, i'll change that name with you. and what make you from wittenberg, horatio? marcellus!", "my good lord."], ["marcellus i am very glad to see you. barnardo good even, sir. horatio but what, in faith, make you from wittenberg?", "a truant disposition, good my lord.", "i would not hear your enemy say so, nor shall you do mine ear that violence, to make it truster of your own report against yourself. i know you are no truant. but what is your affair in elsinore? we'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.", "my lord, i came to see your father's funeral.", "i pray thee, do not mock me, fellow student. i think it was to see my mother's wedding.", "indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.", "thrift, thrift, horatio! the funeral baked meats did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. would i had met my dearest foe in heaven or ever i had seen that day, horatio. my father methinks i see my father.", "where, my lord?", "in my mind's eye, horatio.", "i saw him once. he was a goodly king.", "he was a man. take him for all in all. i shall not look upon his like again."], ["my lord, i think i saw him yesternight.", "saw who?", "my lord, the king your father.", "the king my father?!", "season your admiration for a while with an attent ear, till i may deliver, upon the witness of these gentlemen, this marvel to you.", "for god's love, let me hear.", "two nights together had these gentlemen, marcellus and barnardo, on their watch, in the dead waste and middle of the night, been thus encountered: a figure like your father, armed at point exactly, cap--pie, appears before them and with solemn march goes slow and stately by them. thrice he walked by their oppressed and fear-surprisd eyes within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled almost to jelly with the act of fear, stand dumb and speak not to him. this to me in dreadful secrecy impart they did, and i with them the third night kept the watch, where as they had delivered, both in time, form of the thing, each word made true and good the apparition comes. i knew your father. these hands are not more like.", "but where was this?"], ["my lord, upon the platform where we watch.", "did you not speak to it?", "my lord, i did, but answer made it none. yet once methought it lifted up its head and did address itself to motion, like as it would speak. but even then the morning cock crew loud, and at the sound it shrunk in haste away and vanished from our sight.", "'tis very strange.", "as i do live, my honored lord, 'tis true. and we did think it writ down in our duty to let you know of it.", "indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me. hold you the watch tonight?", "we do, my lord.", "armed, say you?", "armed, my lord.", "from top to toe?", "my lord, from head to foot.", "then saw you not his face?", "oh yes, my lord. he wore his beaver up."], ["what, looked he frowningly?", "a countenance more in sorrow than in anger.", "pale or red?", "nay, very pale.", "and fixed his eyes upon you?", "most constantly.", "i would i had been there.", "it would have much amazed you.", "very like. stayed it long?", "while one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.", "longer, longer.", "not when i saw 't.", "his beard was grizzled, no?", "it was, as i have seen it in his life, a sable silvered.", "i will watch tonight. perchance 'twill walk again.", "i warrant it will."], ["if it assume my noble father's person, i'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape and bid me hold my peace. i pray you all, if you have hitherto concealed this sight, let it be tenable in your silence still. and whatsoever else shall hap tonight, give it an understanding, but no tongue. i will requite your loves. so fare you well. upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve, i'll visit you.", "our duty to your honor.", "your loves, as mine to you. farewell.", "my father's spirit in arms. all is not well. i doubt some foul play. would the night were come! till then sit still, my soul. foul deeds will rise, though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes."], ["my necessaries are embarked. farewell. and, sister, as the winds give benefit and convey is assistant, do not sleep, but let me hear from you.", "do you doubt that?", "for hamlet and the trifling of his favor, hold it a fashion and a toy in blood, a violet in the youth of primy nature, forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting, the perfume and suppliance of a minute. no more.", "no more but so?", "think it no more. for nature, crescent, does not grow alone in thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, the inward service of the mind and soul grows wide withal. perhaps he loves you now, and now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch the virtue of his will, but you must fear. his greatness weighed, his will is not his own, for he himself is subject to his birth. he may not, as unvalued persons do, carve for himself, for on his choice depends the safety and health of this whole state. and therefore must his choice be circumscribed unto the voice and yielding of that body whereof he is the head. then if he says he loves you,"], ["it fits your wisdom so far to believe it as he in his particular act and place may give his saying deed, which is no further than the main voice of denmark goes withal. then weigh what loss your honor may sustain if with too credent ear you list his songs, or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open to his unmastered importunity. fear it, ophelia. fear it, my dear sister, and keep you in the rear of your affection, out of the shot and danger of desire. the chariest maid is prodigal enough if she unmask her beauty to the moon. virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes. the canker galls the infants of the spring too oft before their buttons be disclosed. and in the morn and liquid dew of youth, contagious blastments are most imminent. be wary, then. best safety lies in fear. youth to itself rebels, though none else near.", "i shall the effect of this good lesson keep as watchman to my heart. but, good my brother, do not, as some ungracious pastors do, show me the steep and thorny way to heaven whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine, himself the primrose path of dalliance treads and recks not his own rede.", "o, fear me not.", "i stay too long. but here my father comes. a double blessing is a double grace. occasion smiles upon a second leave."], ["yet here, laertes? aboard, aboard, for shame! the wind sits in the shoulder of your sail and you are stayed for. there, my blessing with thee. and these few precepts in thy memory look thou character. give thy thoughts no tongue, nor any unproportioned thought his act. be thou familiar but by no means vulgar. those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel, but do not dull thy palm with entertainment of each new-hatched, unfledged comrade. beware of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, bear 't that th' opposd may beware of thee. give every man thy ear but few thy voice. take each man's censure but reserve thy judgment. costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, but not expressed in fancy rich, not gaudy, for the apparel oft proclaims the man, and they in france of the best rank and station are of a most select and generous chief in that. neither a borrower nor a lender be, for loan oft loses both itself and friend, and borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. this above all: to thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man. farewell. my blessing season this in thee.", "most humbly do i take my leave, my lord.", "the time invites you. go. your servants tend.", "farewell, ophelia, and remember well what i have said to you."], ["'tis in my memory locked, and you yourself shall keep the key of it.", "farewell.", "what is 't, ophelia, he hath said to you?", "so please you, something touching the lord hamlet.", "marry, well bethought. 'tis told me he hath very oft of late given private time to you, and you yourself have of your audience been most free and bounteous. if it be so as so 'tis put on me and that in way of caution i must tell you, you do not understand yourself so clearly as it behooves my daughter and your honor. what is between you? give me up the truth.", "he hath, my lord, of late made many tenders of his affection to me.", "affection! pooh, you speak like a green girl, unsifted in such perilous circumstance. do you believe his \"tenders,\" as you call them?", "i do not know, my lord, what i should think.", "marry, i'll teach you. think yourself a baby that you have ta'en these tenders for true pay, which are not sterling. tender yourself more dearly, or not to crack the wind of the poor phrase, running it thus you'll tender me a fool."], ["my lord, he hath importuned me with love in honorable fashion.", "ay, \"fashion\" you may call it. go to, go to.", "and hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, with almost all the holy vows of heaven.", "ay, springes to catch woodcocks. i do know, when the blood burns, how prodigal the soul lends the tongue vows. these blazes, daughter, giving more light than heat, extinct in both even in their promise as it is a-making, you must not take for fire. from this time be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence. set your entreatments at a higher rate than a command to parley. for lord hamlet, believe so much in him that he is young, and with a larger tether may he walk than may be given you. in few, ophelia, do not believe his vows, for they are brokers not of that dye which their investments show, but mere implorators of unholy suits, breathing like sanctified and pious bawds, the better to beguile. this is for all: i would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, have you so slander any moment leisure, as to give words or talk with the lord hamlet. look to 't, i charge you. come your ways.", "i shall obey, my lord."], ["the air bites shrewdly. it is very cold.", "it is a nipping and an eager air.", "what hour now?", "i think it lacks of twelve.", "no, it is struck.", "indeed? i heard it not. it then draws near the season wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.", "what does this mean, my lord?", "the king doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, keeps wassail and the swaggering upspring reels, and, as he drains his draughts of rhenish down, the kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out the triumph of his pledge.", "is it a custom?", "ay, marry, is 't. but to my mind, though i am native here and to the manner born, it is a custom more honored in the breach than the observance. this heavy-headed revel east and west makes us traduced and taxed of other nations."], ["they clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase soil our addition. and indeed it takes from our achievements, though performed at height, the pith and marrow of our attribute. so oft it chances in particular men that for some vicious mole of nature in them as in their birth (wherein they are not guilty, since nature cannot choose his origin), by the o'ergrowth of some complexion, oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, or by some habit that too much o'erleavens the form of plausive manners that these men, carrying, i say, the stamp of one defect, being nature's livery or fortune's star, their virtues else (be they as pure as grace, as infinite as man may undergo) shall in the general censure take corruption from that particular fault. the dram of evil doth all the noble substance of a doubt to his own scandal.", "look, my lord, it comes!", "angels and ministers of grace defend us! be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned, bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, be thy intents wicked or charitable, thou comest in such a questionable shape that i will speak to thee. i'll call thee \"hamlet,\" \"king,\" \"father,\" \"royal dane.\" o, answer me! let me not burst in ignorance, but tell why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,"], ["wherein we saw thee quietly interred, hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws to cast thee up again. what may this mean, that thou, dead corse, again in complete steel revisits thus the glimpses of the moon, making night hideous and we fools of nature, so horridly to shake our disposition with thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls? say why is this? wherefore? what should we do?", "it beckons you to go away with it, as if it some impartment did desire to you alone.", "look, with what courteous action it waves you to a more removd ground. but do not go with it.", "no, by no means.", "it will not speak. then i will follow it.", "do not, my lord.", "why, what should be the fear? i do not set my life in a pin's fee, and for my soul what can it do to that, being a thing immortal as itself? it waves me forth again. i'll follow it.", "what if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, or to the dreadful summit of the cliff that beetles o'er his base into the sea,"], ["and there assume some other horrible form, which might deprive your sovereignty of reason and draw you into madness? think of it. the very place puts toys of desperation, without more motive, into every brain that looks so many fathoms to the sea and hears it roar beneath.", "it waves me still. go on. i'll follow thee.", "you shall not go, my lord.", "hold off your hands.", "be ruled. you shall not go.", "my fate cries out and makes each petty artery in this body as hardy as the nemean lion's nerve. still am i called. unhand me, gentlemen. by heaven, i'll make a ghost of him that lets me. i say, away! go on. i'll follow thee.", "he waxes desperate with imagination.", "let's follow. 'tis not fit thus to obey him.", "have after. to what issue will this come?"], ["something is rotten in the state of denmark.", "heaven will direct it.", "nay, let's follow him."], ["where wilt thou lead me? speak, i'll go no further.", "mark me.", "i will.", "my hour is almost come when i to sulfurous and tormenting flames must render up myself.", "alas, poor ghost!", "pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing to what i shall unfold.", "speak. i am bound to hear.", "so art thou to revenge when thou shalt hear.", "what?", "i am thy father's spirit, doomed for a certain term to walk the night and for the day confined to fast in fires, till the foul crimes done in my days of nature are burnt and purged away. but that i am forbid to tell the secrets of my prison house, i could a tale unfold whose lightest word would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,"], ["make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, thy knotted and combind locks to part and each particular hair to stand on end, like quills upon the fearful porpentine. but this eternal blazon must not be to ears of flesh and blood. list, list, o, list! if thou didst ever thy dear father love", "o god!", "revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.", "murder?", "murder most foul, as in the best it is. but this most foul, strange and unnatural.", "haste me to know 't, that i, with wings as swift as meditation or the thoughts of love, may sweep to my revenge.", "i find thee apt, and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed that roots itself in ease on lethe wharf, wouldst thou not stir in this. now, hamlet, hear. 'tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, a serpent stung me. so the whole ear of denmark is by a forgd process of my death rankly abused. but know, thou noble youth, the serpent that did sting thy father's life now wears his crown.", "o my prophetic soul! my uncle?"], ["ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, with witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts o wicked wit and gifts, that have the power so to seduce! won to his shameful lust the will of my most seeming-virtuous queen. o hamlet, what a falling off was there! from me, whose love was of that dignity that it went hand in hand even with the vow i made to her in marriage, and to decline upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor to those of mine. but virtue, as it never will be moved, though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, so lust, though to a radiant angel linked, will sate itself in a celestial bed and prey on garbage. but soft! methinks i scent the morning air. brief let me be. sleeping within my orchard, my custom always of the afternoon, upon my secure hour thy uncle stole with juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, and in the porches of my ears did pour the leperous distilment, whose effect holds such an enmity with blood of man that swift as quicksilver it courses through the natural gates and alleys of the body and with a sudden vigor doth posset and curd, like eager droppings into milk, the thin and wholesome blood. so did it mine. and a most instant tetter barked about, most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust all my smooth body. thus was i, sleeping, by a brother's hand of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched, cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,"], ["unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled. no reckoning made, but sent to my account with all my imperfections on my head. oh, horrible, oh, horrible, most horrible! if thou hast nature in thee, bear it not. let not the royal bed of denmark be a couch for luxury and damnd incest. but howsoever thou pursuest this act, taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive against thy mother aught. leave her to heaven and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge to prick and sting her. fare thee well at once. the glowworm shows the matin to be near, and 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire. adieu, adieu, adieu. remember me.", "o all you host of heaven! o earth! what else? and shall i couple hell? oh, fie! hold, hold, my heart, and you, my sinews, grow not instant old, but bear me stiffly up. remember thee! ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat in this distracted globe. remember thee! yea, from the table of my memory i'll wipe away all trivial fond records, all saws of books, all forms, all pressures past that youth and observation copied there, and thy commandment all alone shall live within the book and volume of my brain, unmixed with baser matter. yes, by heaven! o most pernicious woman! o villain, villain, smiling, damnd villain! my tables! meet it is i set it down that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain. at least i'm sure it may be so in denmark. so, uncle, there you are. now to my word."], ["it is \"adieu, adieu. remember me.\" i have sworn 't.", "my lord, my lord!", "lord hamlet", "heaven secure him!", "so be it.", "illo, ho, ho, my lord!", "hillo, ho, ho, boy. come, bird, come.", "how is 't, my noble lord?", "what news, my lord?", "oh, wonderful!", "good my lord, tell it.", "no. you'll reveal it.", "not i, my lord, by heaven.", "nor i, my lord.", "how say you, then? would heart of man once think it? but you'll be secret?", "ay, by heaven, my lord."], ["there's ne'er a villain dwelling in all denmark but he's an arrant knave.", "there needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave to tell us this.", "why, right, you are in the right. and so, without more circumstance at all, i hold it fit that we shake hands and part. you, as your business and desire shall point you for every man has business and desire, such as it is and for my own poor part, look you, i'll go pray.", "these are but wild and whirling words, my lord.", "i'm sorry they offend you, heartily. yes faith, heartily.", "there's no offense, my lord.", "yes, by saint patrick, but there is, horatio, and much offense too. touching this vision here, it is an honest ghost, that let me tell you. for your desire to know what is between us, o'ermaster 't as you may. and now, good friends, as you are friends, scholars and soldiers, give me one poor request.", "what is 't, my lord? we will.", "never make known what you have seen tonight.", "my lord, we will not."], ["nay, but swear 't.", "in faith, my lord, not i.", "nor i, my lord, in faith.", "upon my sword.", "we have sworn, my lord, already.", "indeed, upon my sword, indeed.", "swear!", "ha, ha, boy! sayst thou so? art thou there, truepenny? come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage. consent to swear.", "propose the oath, my lord.", "never to speak of this that you have seen. swear by my sword.", "swear.", "? then we'll shift our ground. come hither, gentlemen, and lay your hands again upon my sword. swear by my sword never to speak of this that you have heard.", "swear by his sword.", "well said, old mole! canst work i' th' earth so fast? a worthy pioneer! once more remove, good friends."], ["o day and night, but this is wondrous strange!", "and therefore as a stranger give it welcome. there are more things in heaven and earth, horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy. but come, here, as before, never, so help you mercy, how strange or odd soe'er i bear myself (as i perchance hereafter shall think meet to put an antic disposition on), that you, at such times seeing me, never shall with arms encumbered thus, or this headshake, or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, as \"well, well, we know,\" or \"we could an if we would,\" or \"if we list to speak,\" or \"there be an if they might,\" or such ambiguous giving out to note that you know aught of me. this not to do, so grace and mercy at your most need help you, swear.", "swear!", "rest, rest, perturbd spirit! so, gentlemen, with all my love i do commend me to you, and what so poor a man as hamlet is may do, to express his love and friending to you, god willing, shall not lack. let us go in together, and still your fingers on your lips, i pray. the time is out of joint. o cursd spite, that ever i was born to set it right! nay, come, let's go together."], ["give him this money and these notes, reynaldo.", "i will, my lord.", "you shall do marvelous wisely, good reynaldo, before you visit him, to make inquire of his behavior.", "my lord, i did intend it.", "marry, well said, very well said. look you, sir, inquire me first what danskers are in paris, and how, and who, what means, and where they keep what company at what expense; and finding by this encompassment and drift of question that they do know my son, come you more nearer than your particular demands will touch it. take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him, as thus: \"i know his father and his friends, and, in part, him.\" do you mark this, reynaldo?", "ay, very well, my lord.", "\"and in part him, but,\" you may say, \"not well. but, if 't be he i mean, he's very wild. addicted so and so. \" and there put on him what forgeries you please. marry, none so rank as may dishonor him. take heed of that. but, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips"], ["as are companions noted and most known to youth and liberty.", "as gaming, my lord?", "ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarreling, drabbing you may go so far.", "my lord, that would dishonor him!", "'faith, no, as you may season it in the charge. you must not put another scandal on him that he is open to incontinency. that's not my meaning. but breathe his faults so quaintly that they may seem the taints of liberty, the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, a savageness in unreclaimd blood, of general assault.", "but, my good lord", "wherefore should you do this?", "ay, my lord. i would know that.", "marry, sir, here's my drift: (and i believe it is a fetch of wit) you, laying these slight sullies on my son as 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working mark you, your party in converse, him you would sound, having ever seen in the prenominate crimes the youth you breathe of guilty, be assured he closes with you in this consequence: \"good sir\" or so, or \"friend,\" or \"gentleman,\" according to the phrase or the addition of man and country."], ["very good, my lord.", "and then, sir, does he this, he does what was i about to say? by the mass, i was about to say something. where did i leave?", "at \"closes in the consequence,\" at \"friend,' or so\" and \"gentleman.'\"", "at \"closes in the consequence.\" ay, marry. he closes thus: \"i know the gentleman. i saw him yesterday\" or \"t' other day,\" or then, or then, with such or such \"and, as you say, there was he gaming, there o'ertook in's rouse, there falling out at tennis,\" or, perchance, \"i saw him enter such a house of sale\" a brothel, or so forth. see you now, your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth. and thus do we of wisdom and of reach, with windlasses and with assays of bias, by indirections find directions out. so by my former lecture and advice shall you my son. you have me, have you not?", "my lord, i have.", "god be wi' you. fare you well.", "good my lord.", "observe his inclination in yourself.", "i shall, my lord."], ["and let him ply his music.", "well, my lord.", "farewell.", "how now, ophelia? what's the matter?", "o my lord, my lord, i have been so affrighted!", "with what, i' th' name of god?", "my lord, as i was sewing in my closet, lord hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced; no hat upon his head; his stockings fouled, ungartered, and down-gyvd to his ankle; pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; and with a look so piteous in purport as if he had been loosd out of hell to speak of horrors he comes before me.", "mad for thy love?", "my lord, i do not know. but truly, i do fear it.", "what said he?", "he took me by the wrist and held me hard. then goes he to the length of all his arm, and, with his other hand thus o'er his brow, he falls to such perusal of my face as he would draw it. long stayed he so."], ["at last, a little shaking of mine arm and thrice his head thus waving up and down, he raised a sigh so piteous and profound as it did seem to shatter all his bulk and end his being. that done, he lets me go, and, with his head over his shoulder turned, he seemed to find his way without his eyes, for out o' doors he went without their helps, and to the last bended their light on me.", "come, go with me. i will go seek the king. this is the very ecstasy of love, whose violent property fordoes itself and leads the will to desperate undertakings as oft as any passion under heaven that does afflict our natures. i am sorry. what, have you given him any hard words of late?", "no, my good lord. but as you did command i did repel his fetters and denied his access to me.", "that hath made him mad. i am sorry that with better heed and judgment i had not quoted him. i feared he did but trifle and meant to wreck thee. but beshrew my jealousy! by heaven, it is as proper to our age to cast beyond ourselves in our opinions as it is common for the younger sort to lack discretion. come, go we to the king. this must be known, which, being kept close, might move more grief to hide than hate to utter love. come."], ["welcome, dear rosencrantz and guildenstern. moreover that we much did long to see you, the need we have to use you did provoke our hasty sending. something have you heard of hamlet's \"transformation\" so call it since nor th' exterior nor the inward man resembles that it was. what it should be, more than his father's death, that thus hath put him so much from th' understanding of himself, i cannot dream of. i entreat you both that, being of so young days brought up with him and since so neighbored to his youth and 'havior, that you vouchsafe your rest here in our court some little time so by your companies to draw him on to pleasures and to gather, so much as from occasion you may glean, whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus that, opened, lies within our remedy.", "good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you. and sure i am two men there are not living to whom he more adheres. if it will please you to show us so much gentry and good will as to expend your time with us awhile for the supply and profit of our hope, your visitation shall receive such thanks as fits a king's remembrance."], ["both your majesties might, by the sovereign power you have of us, put your dread pleasures more into command than to entreaty.", "but we both obey and here give up ourselves, in the full bent, to lay our service freely at your feet to be commanded.", "thanks, rosencrantz and gentle guildenstern.", "thanks, guildenstern and gentle rosencrantz. and i beseech you instantly to visit my too much changd son. go, some of you, and bring these gentlemen where hamlet is.", "heavens make our presence and our practices pleasant and helpful to him!", "ay, amen!", "th' ambassadors from norway, my good lord, are joyfully returned.", "thou still hast been the father of good news.", "have i, my lord? i assure my good liege, i hold my duty as i hold my soul, both to my god and to my gracious king."], ["and i do think or else this brain of mine hunts not the trail of policy so sure as it hath used to do that i have found the very cause of hamlet's lunacy.", "oh, speak of that. that do i long to hear.", "give first admittance to th' ambassadors. my news shall be the fruit to that great feast.", "thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.", "he tells me, my dear gertrude, he hath found the head and source of all your son's distemper.", "i doubt it is no other but the main: his father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.", "well, we shall sift him. welcome, my good friends! say, voltemand, what from our brother norway?", "most fair return of greetings and desires. upon our first, he sent out to suppress his nephew's levies, which to him appeared to be a preparation 'gainst the polack, but, better looked into, he truly found it was against your highness. whereat grieved that so his sickness, age, and impotence was falsely borne in hand sends out arrests on fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys, receives rebuke from norway, and in fine makes vow before his uncle never more to give th' assay of arms against your majesty. whereon old norway, overcome with joy,"], ["gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee and his commission to employ those soldiers, so levied as before, against the polack, with an entreaty, herein further shown, that it might please you to give quiet pass through your dominions for this enterprise, on such regards of safety and allowance as therein are set down. claudius", "it likes us well, and at our more considered time we'll read, answer, and think upon this business. meantime we thank you for your well-took labor. go to your rest. at night we'll feast together. most welcome home!", "this business is well ended. my liege and madam, to expostulate what majesty should be, what duty is, why day is day, night night, and time is time, were nothing but to waste night, day, and time. therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, i will be brief: your noble son is mad. mad call i it, for, to define true madness, what is 't but to be nothing else but mad? but let that go.", "more matter, with less art.", "madam, i swear i use no art at all. that he is mad, 'tis true. tis true, 'tis pity, and pity 'tis 'tis true a foolish figure, but farewell it, for i will use no art. mad let us grant him then. and now remains"], ["that we find out the cause of this effect, or rather say, the cause of this defect, for this effect defective comes by cause. thus it remains, and the remainder thus. perpend. i have a daughter have while she is mine who in her duty and obedience, mark, hath given me this. now gather and surmise. \"to the celestial and my soul's idol, the most beautified ophelia\" that's an ill phrase, a vile phrase. \"beautified\" is a vile phrase. but you shall hear. thus: \"in her excellent white bosom, these,\" etc.", "came this from hamlet to her?", "good madam, stay a while. i will be faithful. \" , , , . o dear ophelia, i am ill at these numbers. i have not art to reckon my groans, but that i love thee best, oh, most best, believe it. adieu. , , hamlet.\" this in obedience hath my daughter shown me, and more above, hath his solicitings, as they fell out by time, by means, and place, all given to mine ear.", "but how hath she received his love?", "what do you think of me?"], ["as of a man faithful and honorable.", "i would fain prove so. but what might you think, when i had seen this hot love on the wing as i perceived it, i must tell you that, before my daughter told me what might you, or my dear majesty your queen here, think, if i had played the desk or table-book, or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, or looked upon this love with idle sight? what might you think? no, i went round to work, and my young mistress thus i did bespeak: \"lord hamlet is a prince out of thy star. this must not be.\" and then i prescripts gave her, that she should lock herself from his resort, admit no messengers, receive no tokens. which done, she took the fruits of my advice; and he, repelled a short tale to make fell into a sadness, then into a fast, thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, thence to a lightness, and, by this declension, into the madness wherein now he raves and all we mourn for.", "gertrude do you think 'tis this?", "it may be, very like.", "hath there been such a time i would fain know that that i have positively said, \"'tis so,\" when it proved otherwise?", "not that i know."], ["take this from this if this be otherwise. if circumstances lead me, i will find where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed within the center.", "how may we try it further?", "you know sometimes he walks four hours together here in the lobby.", "so he does indeed.", "at such a time i'll loose my daughter to him. claudius be you and i behind an arras then, mark the encounter. if he love her not and be not from his reason fall'n thereon, let me be no assistant for a state but keep a farm and carters.", "we will try it.", "but look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.", "away, i do beseech you, both away. i'll board him presently. o, give me leave.", "how does my good lord hamlet?", "well, god-'a'-mercy.", "do you know me, my lord?"], ["excellent well. you are a fishmonger.", "not i, my lord.", "then i would you were so honest a man.", "honest, my lord?", "ay, sir. to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.", "that's very true, my lord.", "for if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good kissing carrion have you a daughter?", "i have, my lord.", "let her not walk i' th' sun. conception is a blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive friend, look to 't.", "how say you by that? still harping on my daughter. yet he knew me not at first. he said i was a fishmonger. he is far gone, far gone. and truly in my youth i suffered much extremity for love, very near this. i'll speak to him again. hamlet what do you read, my lord?", "words, words, words.", "what is the matter, my lord?", "between who?"], ["i mean, the matter that you read, my lord.", "slanders, sir. for the satirical rogue says here that old men have gray beards, that their faces are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams all which, sir, though i most powerfully and potently believe, yet i hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for yourself, sir, should be old as i am, if like a crab you could go backward.", "though this be madness, yet there is method in 't. hamlet will you walk out of the air, my lord?", "into my grave.", "indeed, that is out of the air. how pregnant sometimes his replies are. a happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. i will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter. hamlet my honorable lord, i will most humbly take my leave of you.", "you cannot, sir, take from me any thing that i will more willingly part withal except my life, except my life, except my life.", "fare you well, my lord.", "these tedious old fools!", "you go to seek the lord hamlet. there he is."], ["god save you, sir!", "my honored lord!", "my most dear lord!", "my excellent good friends! how dost thou, guildenstern? ah, rosencrantz! good lads, how do you both?", "as the indifferent children of the earth.", "happy, in that we are not overhappy. on fortune's cap we are not the very button.", "nor the soles of her shoes?", "neither, my lord.", "then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favors?", "faith, her privates we.", "in the secret parts of fortune? oh, most true. she is a strumpet. what news?", "none, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.", "then is doomsday near. but your news is not true. let me question more in particular. what have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune that she sends you to prison hither?"], ["prison, my lord?", "denmark's a prison.", "then is the world one.", "a goodly one, in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons, denmark being one o' th' worst.", "we think not so, my lord.", "why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so. to me it is a prison.", "why then, your ambition makes it one. 'tis too narrow for your mind.", "o god, i could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that i have bad dreams.", "which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.", "a dream itself is but a shadow.", "truly, and i hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.", "then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows. shall we to th' court? for by my fay, i cannot reason.", "we'll wait upon you."], ["no such matter. i will not sort you with the rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an honest man, i am most dreadfully attended. but in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at elsinore?", "to visit you, my lord, no other occasion.", "beggar that i am, i am even poor in thanks; but i thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. were you not sent for? is it your own inclining? is it a free visitation? come, come, deal justly with me. come, come. nay, speak.", "what should we say, my lord?", "why, any thing, but to th' purpose. you were sent for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to color. i know the good king and queen have sent for you.", "to what end, my lord?", "that you must teach me. but let me conjure you, by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal: be even and direct with me whether you were sent for or no.", "guildenstern what say you?", "nay, then, i have an eye of you if you love me, hold not off.", "my lord, we were sent for."], ["i will tell you why. so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. i have of late but wherefore i know not lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises, and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the air look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors. what a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason, how infinite in faculty! in form and moving how express and admirable! in action how like an angel, in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the world. the paragon of animals. and yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not me. no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.", "my lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.", "why did you laugh then, when i said \"man delights not me\"?", "to think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten entertainment the players shall receive from you. we coted them on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.", "he that plays the king shall be welcome. his majesty shall have tribute of me. the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for 't. what players are they?"], ["even those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians of the city.", "how chances it they travel? their residence, both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.", "i think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.", "do they hold the same estimation they did when i was in the city? are they so followed?", "no, indeed are they not.", "how comes it? do they grow rusty?", "nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted pace. but there is, sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are most tyrannically clapped for 't. these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages so they call them that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose quills and dare scarce come thither."], ["what, are they children? who maintains 'em? how are they escoted? will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players (as it is most like if their means are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession?", "faith, there has been much to do on both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar them to controversy. there was, for a while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.", "is 't possible?", "oh, there has been much throwing about of brains.", "do the boys carry it away?", "ay, that they do, my lord. hercules and his load too.", "it is not very strange. for my uncle is king of denmark, and those that would make mouths at him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little. 'sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.", "there are the players.", "gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore. your hands, come then. th' appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. let me comply with you in this garb lest my extent to the players, which, i tell you, must show fairly outwards, should more appear like entertainment than yours. you are welcome. but my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived."], ["in what, my dear lord?", "i am but mad north-north-west. when the wind is southerly, i know a hawk from a handsaw.", "well be with you, gentlemen.", "hark you, guildenstern, and you too at each ear a hearer. polonius that great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts", "happily he's the second time come to them, for they say an old man is twice a child.", "rosencrantz guildenstern i will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. mark it. polonius you say right, sir. o' monday morning, 'twas so indeed.", "my lord, i have news to tell you.", "my lord, i have news to tell you. when roscius was an actor in rome", "the actors are come hither, my lord.", "buzz, buzz.", "upon my honor", "then came each actor on his ass"], ["the best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem unlimited. seneca cannot be too heavy, nor plautus too light. for the law of writ and the liberty, these are the only men.", "o jephthah, judge of israel, what a treasure hadst thou!", "what a treasure had he, my lord?", "why, , .", "still on my daughter.", "am i not i' th' right, old jephthah?", "if you call me jephthah, my lord, i have a daughter that i love passing well.", "nay, that follows not.", "what follows, then, my lord?", "why,"], ["and then, you know, the first row of the pious chanson will show you more, for look where my abridgement comes.", "you are welcome, masters, welcome, all! i am glad to see thee well. welcome, good friends. o old friend? why, thy face is valenced since i saw thee last. comest thou to beard me in denmark? what, my young lady and mistress! by 'r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when i saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. pray god, your voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. masters, you are all welcome. we'll e'en to 't like french falconers, fly at any thing we see. we'll have a speech straight. come, give us a taste of your quality. come, a passionate speech.", "what speech, my good lord?", "i heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted. or, if it was, not above once, for the play, i remember, pleased not the million. 'twas caviary to the general. but it was as i received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning."], ["i remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation, but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. one speech in it i chiefly loved. 'twas aeneas' tale to dido and thereabout of it, especially where he speaks of priam's slaughter. if it live in your >memory, begin at this line let me see, let me see it is not so. it begins with pyrrhus , , , , , , . so, proceed you.", "'fore god, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.", ", , , , , , . ,"], [", . , , . . , , ,", "this is too long.", "it shall to the barber's, with your beard. prithee, say on. he's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. say on. come to hecuba.", "", "\"the mobld queen\"?"], ["that's good. \"mobld queen\" is good.", ", , , . , , , .", "look whe'e he has not turned his color and has tears in 's eyes. prithee, no more.", "first player 'tis well. i'll have thee speak out the rest soon. polonius good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? do you hear, let them be well used, for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time. after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.", "my lord, i will use them according to their desert.", "god's bodykins, man, much better. use every man after his desert, and who should 'scape whipping? use them after your own honor and dignity. the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. take them in."], ["come, sirs.", "follow him, friends. we'll hear a play tomorrow. first player dost thou hear me, old friend? can you play ?", "ay, my lord.", "we'll ha 't tomorrow night. you could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which i would set down and insert in 't, could you not?", "ay, my lord.", "very well. follow that lord, and look you mock him not.", "my good friends, i'll leave you till night. you are welcome to elsinore.", "good my lord.", "ay, so. good-bye to you.", "now i am alone. oh, what a rogue and peasant slave am i! is it not monstrous that this player here, but in a fiction, in a dream of passion, could force his soul so to his own conceit that from her working all his visage wanned, tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect, a broken voice, and his whole function suiting with forms to his conceit? and all for nothing for hecuba! what's hecuba to him or he to hecuba that he should weep for her? what would he do had he the motive and the cue for passion that i have? he would drown the stage with tears and cleave the general ear with horrid speech, make mad the guilty and appall the free,"], ["confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed the very faculties of eyes and ears. yet i, a dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak like john-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause, and can say nothing no, not for a king, upon whose property and most dear life a damned defeat was made. am i a coward? who calls me \"villain\"? breaks my pate across? plucks off my beard and blows it in my face? tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat as deep as to the lungs? who does me this? ha! 'swounds, i should take it, for it cannot be but i am pigeon-livered and lack gall to make oppression bitter, or ere this i should have fatted all the region kites with this slave's offal. bloody, bawdy villain! remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain! o vengeance! why, what an ass am i! this is most brave, that i, the son of a dear father murdered, prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell, must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words and fall a-cursing like a very drab, a scullion! fie upon 't, foh! about, my brain. hum, i have heard that guilty creatures sitting at a play have, by the very cunning of the scene, been struck so to the soul that presently they have proclaimed their malefactions. for murder, though it have no tongue, will speak with most miraculous organ. i'll have these players play something like the murder of my father before mine uncle. i'll observe his looks. i'll tent him to the quick. if he do blench, i know my course. the spirit that i have seen"], ["may be the devil, and the devil hath power t' assume a pleasing shape. yea, and perhaps out of my weakness and my melancholy, as he is very potent with such spirits, abuses me to damn me. i'll have grounds more relative than this. the play's the thing wherein i'll catch the conscience of the king."], ["and can you by no drift of conference get from him why he puts on this confusion, grating so harshly all his days of quiet with turbulent and dangerous lunacy?", "he does confess he feels himself distracted. but from what cause he will by no means speak.", "nor do we find him forward to be sounded. but with a crafty madness keeps aloof when we would bring him on to some confession of his true state.", "did he receive you well?", "most like a gentleman.", "but with much forcing of his disposition.", "niggard of question, but of our demands most free in his reply.", "did you assay him? to any pastime?", "madam, it so fell out, that certain players we o'erraught on the way. of these we told him, and there did seem in him a kind of joy"], ["to hear of it. they are about the court, and, as i think, they have already order this night to play before him.", "'tis most true, and he beseeched me to entreat your majesties to hear and see the matter.", "with all my heart, and it doth much content me to hear him so inclined. good gentlemen, give him a further edge, and drive his purpose on to these delights.", "we shall, my lord.", "sweet gertrude, leave us too, for we have closely sent for hamlet hither, that he, as 'twere by accident, may here affront ophelia. her father and myself (lawful espials) will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen, we may of their encounter frankly judge, and gather by him, as he is behaved, if 't be the affliction of his love or no that thus he suffers for.", "i shall obey you. and for your part, ophelia, i do wish that your good beauties be the happy cause of hamlet's wildness. so shall i hope your virtues will bring him to his wonted way again, to both your honors.", "madam, i wish it may."], ["ophelia, walk you here. claudius gracious, so please you, we will bestow ourselves. ophelia read on this book that show of such an exercise may color your loneliness. we are oft to blame in this, 'tis too much proved, that with devotion's visage and pious action we do sugar o'er the devil himself.", "oh, 'tis too true! how smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! the harlot's cheek, beautied with plastering art, is not more ugly to the thing that helps it than is my deed to my most painted word. o heavy burden!", "i hear him coming. let's withdraw, my lord.", "to be, or not to be? that is the question whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, or to take arms against a sea of troubles, and, by opposing, end them? to die, to sleep no more and by a sleep to say we end the heartache and the thousand natural shocks that flesh is heir to 'tis a consummation devoutly to be wished! to die, to sleep. to sleep, perchance to dream ay, there's the rub, for in that sleep of death what dreams may come when we have shuffled off this mortal coil, must give us pause. there's the respect that makes calamity of so long life."], ["for who would bear the whips and scorns of time, th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, the pangs of despised love, the law's delay, the insolence of office, and the spurns that patient merit of th' unworthy takes, when he himself might his quietus make with a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, to grunt and sweat under a weary life, but that the dread of something after death, the undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveler returns, puzzles the will and makes us rather bear those ills we have than fly to others that we know not of? thus conscience does make cowards of us all, and thus the native hue of resolution is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought, and enterprises of great pith and moment with this regard their currents turn awry, and lose the name of action. soft you now, the fair ophelia! nymph, in thy orisons be all my sins remembered.", "good my lord, how does your honor for this many a day?", "i humbly thank you. well, well, well.", "my lord, i have remembrances of yours that i have longd long to redeliver. i pray you now receive them.", "no, not i. i never gave you aught.", "my honored lord, you know right well you did, and with them, words of so sweet breath composed as made the things more rich. their perfume lost,"], ["take these again, for to the noble mind rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind. there, my lord.", "ha, ha, are you honest?", "my lord?", "are you fair?", "what means your lordship?", "that if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty.", "could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?", "ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness. this was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. i did love you once.", "indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.", "you should not have believed me, for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. i loved you not.", "i was the more deceived.", "get thee to a nunnery. why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? i am myself indifferent honest, but yet i could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me."], ["i am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than i have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. what should such fellows as i do crawling between earth and heaven? we are arrant knaves, all. believe none of us. go thy ways to a nunnery. where's your father?", "at home, my lord.", "let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool no where but in 's own house. farewell.", "o, help him, you sweet heavens!", "if thou dost marry, i'll give thee this plague for thy dowry. be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. get thee to a nunnery, go. farewell. or, if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them. to a nunnery, go, and quickly too. farewell.", "heavenly powers, restore him!", "i have heard of your paintings too, well enough. god has given you one face and you make yourselves another. you jig and amble, and you lisp, you nickname god's creatures and make your wantonness your ignorance. go to, i'll no more on 't. it hath made me mad. i say, we will have no more marriages. those that are married already, all but one, shall live. the rest shall keep as they are. to a nunnery, go."], ["oh, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown! the courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword, th' expectancy and rose of the fair state, the glass of fashion and the mould of form, th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down! and i, of ladies most deject and wretched, that sucked the honey of his music vows, now see that noble and most sovereign reason like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; that unmatched form and feature of blown youth blasted with ecstasy. oh, woe is me, t' have seen what i have seen, see what i see!", "love? his affections do not that way tend. nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little, was not like madness. there's something in his soul o'er which his melancholy sits on brood, and i do doubt the hatch and the disclose will be some danger which for to prevent, i have in quick determination thus set it down: he shall with speed to england for the demand of our neglected tribute. haply the seas and countries different with variable objects shall expel this something-settled matter in his heart, whereon his brains still beating puts him thus from fashion of himself. what think you on 't?", "it shall do well. but yet do i believe the origin and commencement of his grief sprung from neglected love. how now, ophelia? you need not tell us what lord hamlet said."], ["we heard it all. my lord, do as you please. but, if you hold it fit, after the play let his queen mother all alone entreat him to show his grief. let her be round with him, and i'll be placed, so please you, in the ear of all their conference. if she find him not, to england send him or confine him where your wisdom best shall think.", "it shall be so. madness in great ones must not unwatched go."], ["speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue. but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, i had as lief the town crier spoke my lines. nor do not saw the air too much with your hand thus, but use all gently, for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as i may say) whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. oh, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb-shows and noise. i would have such a fellow whipped for o'erdoing termagant. it out-herods herod. pray you, avoid it.", "i warrant your honor.", "be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor. suit the action to the word, the word to the action, with this special observance that you o'erstep not the modesty of nature. for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. now this overdone or come tardy off, though it make the unskillful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh a whole theatre of others."], ["oh, there be players that i have seen play and heard others praise (and that highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither having th' accent of christians nor the gait of christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that i have thought some of nature's journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.", "i hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, sir.", "o, reform it altogether! and let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them, for there be of them that will themselves laugh to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary question of the play be then to be considered. that's villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. go, make you ready.", "how now, my lord! will the king hear this piece of work?", "and the queen too, and that presently.", "bid the players make haste.", "will you two help to hasten them?", "ay, my lord.", "what ho, horatio!"], ["here, sweet lord, at your service.", "horatio, thou art e'en as just a man as e'er my conversation coped withal.", "o my dear lord", "nay, do not think i flatter. for what advancement may i hope from thee that no revenue hast but thy good spirits, to feed and clothe thee? why should the poor be flattered? no, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, and crook the pregnant hinges of the knee where thrift may follow fawning. dost thou hear? since my dear soul was mistress of her choice and could of men distinguish, her election hath sealed thee for herself, for thou hast been as one in suffering all that suffers nothing a man that fortune's buffets and rewards hast ta'en with equal thanks. and blessed are those whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, that they are not a pipe for fortune's finger to sound what stop she please. give me that man that is not passion's slave, and i will wear him in my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart, as i do thee. something too much of this. there is a play tonight before the king. one scene of it comes near the circumstance which i have told thee of my father's death. i prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, even with the very comment of thy soul observe mine uncle. if his occulted guilt do not itself unkennel in one speech, it is a damnd ghost that we have seen, and my imaginations are as foul"], ["as vulcan's stithy. give him heedful note. for i mine eyes will rivet to his face, and after we will both our judgments join in censure of his seeming.", "well, my lord. if he steal aught the whilst this play is playing, and 'scape detecting, i will pay the theft.", "they are coming to the play. i must be idle. get you a place.", "how fares our cousin hamlet?", "excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. i eat the air, promise-crammed. you cannot feed capons so.", "i have nothing with this answer, hamlet. these words are not mine.", "no, nor mine now. polonius my lord, you played once i' th' university, you say?", "that did i, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.", "what did you enact?", "i did enact julius caesar. i was killed i' th' capitol. brutus killed me."], ["it was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. be the players ready?", "ay, my lord. they stay upon your patience.", "come hither, my dear hamlet, sit by me.", "no, good mother. here's metal more attractive. ophelia", "claudius oh, ho, do you mark that?", "lady, shall i lie in your lap?", "no, my lord.", "i mean, my head upon your lap?", "ay, my lord.", "do you think i meant country matters?", "i think nothing, my lord.", "that's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.", "what is, my lord?", "nothing.", "you are merry, my lord.", "who, i?", "ay, my lord."], ["o god, your only jig-maker. what should a man do but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.", "nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.", "so long? nay then, let the devil wear black, for i'll have a suit of sables. o heavens! die two months ago and not forgotten yet? then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half a year. but, by 'r lady, he must build churches then, or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is \"for, oh, for, oh, the hobby-horse is forgot.\"", "", "what means this, my lord?", "marry, this is miching . it means mischief."], ["belike this show imports the argument of the play.", "we shall know by this fellow. the players cannot keep counsel. they'll tell all.", "will he tell us what this show meant?", "ay, or any show that you will show him. be not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.", "you are naught, you are naught. i'll mark the play.", ", , .", "is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?", "'tis brief, my lord.", "as woman's love."], [", , .", ". , , , . , , . , : . .", ". . ,", "! . ! .", "wormwood, wormwood."], [". .", ", . , , , . . , . . . . . , . . . , , , . , . . , ."], [". . . . . !", "if she should break it now!", ". .", ", .", "madam, how like you this play?", "the lady protests too much, methinks.", "oh, but she'll keep her word.", "have you heard the argument? is there no offense in 't?", "no, no, they do but jest. poison in jest. no offense i' th' world.", "what do you call the play?"], [". marry, how? tropically. this play is the image of a murder done in vienna. gonzago is the duke's name, his wife baptista. you shall see anon. 'tis a knavish piece of work, but what o' that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it touches us not. let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.", "this is one lucianus, nephew to the king.", "you are as good as a chorus, my lord.", "i could interpret between you and your love, if i could see the puppets dallying.", "you are keen, my lord, you are keen.", "it would cost you a groaning to take off mine edge.", "still better and worse.", "so you must take your husbands. begin, murderer. pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. come, \"the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge \"", ", , , , . player king"], ["he poisons him i' th' garden for 's estate. his name's gonzago. the story is extant, and writ in choice italian. you shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of gonzago's wife.", "the king rises.", "what, frighted with false fire?", "how fares my lord?", "give o'er the play.", "give me some light, away!", "lights, lights, lights!", ", . . . would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers if the rest of my fortunes turn turk with me with two provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players?", "half a share.", "a whole one, i. , ."], ["you might have rhymed.", "o good horatio, i'll take the ghost's word for a thousand pound. didst perceive?", "very well, my lord.", "upon the talk of the poisoning?", "i did very well note him.", "ah ha! come, some music! come, the recorders! , . come, some music!", "good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.", "sir, a whole history.", "the king, sir", "ay, sir, what of him?", "is in his retirement marvelous distempered."], ["with drink, sir?", "no, my lord, with choler.", "your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to the doctor. for, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.", "good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and start not so wildly from my affair.", "i am tame, sir. pronounce.", "the queen your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.", "you are welcome.", "nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. if it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, i will do your mother's commandment. if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.", "sir, i cannot.", "what, my lord?", "make you a wholesome answer. my wit's diseased. but, sir, such answer as i can make, you shall command. or, rather, as you say, my mother. therefore no more but to the matter. my mother, you say", "then thus she says: your behavior hath struck her into amazement and admiration."], ["o wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother! but is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? impart.", "she desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.", "we shall obey, were she ten times our mother. have you any further trade with us?", "my lord, you once did love me.", "and do still, by these pickers and stealers.", "good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you do surely bar the door upon your own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.", "sir, i lack advancement.", "how can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself for your succession in denmark?", "ay, sir, but \"while the grass grows \" the proverb is something musty oh, the recorders! let me see one. rosencrantz guildenstern to withdraw with you, why do you go about to recover the wind of me as if you would drive me into a toil?", "o my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly."], ["i do not well understand that. will you play upon this pipe?", "my lord, i cannot.", "i pray you.", "believe me, i cannot.", "i do beseech you.", "i know no touch of it, my lord.", "it is as easy as lying. govern these ventages with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music. look you, these are the stops.", "but these cannot i command to any utterance of harmony. i have not the skill.", "why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! you would play upon me. you would seem to know my stops. you would pluck out the heart of my mystery. you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass. and there is much music, excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it speak? 'sblood, do you think i am easier to be played on than a pipe? call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you cannot play upon me."], ["god bless you, sir.", "my lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.", "do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?", "by th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.", "methinks it is like a weasel.", "it is backed like a weasel.", "or like a whale.", "very like a whale.", "then i will come to my mother by and by. they fool me to the top of my bent. i will come by and by.", "i will say so.", "\"by and by\" is easily said.", "leave me, friends.", "'tis now the very witching time of night, when churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out contagion to this world. now could i drink hot blood and do such bitter business as the bitter day would quake to look on. soft, now to my mother. o heart, lose not thy nature, let not ever the soul of nero enter this firm bosom. let me be cruel, not unnatural."], ["i will speak daggers to her but use none. my tongue and soul in this be hypocrites. how in my words somever she be shent, to give them seals never, my soul, consent!"], ["i like him not, nor stands it safe with us to let his madness range. therefore prepare you. i your commission will forthwith dispatch, and he to england shall along with you. the terms of our estate may not endure hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow out of his lunacies.", "we will ourselves provide. most holy and religious fear it is to keep those many, many bodies safe that live and feed upon your majesty.", "the single and peculiar life is bound with all the strength and armor of the mind to keep itself from noyance, but much more that spirit upon whose weal depend and rest the lives of many. the cease of majesty dies not alone, but, like a gulf, doth draw what's near it with it. it is a massy wheel fixed on the summit of the highest mount, to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls, each small annexment, petty consequence, attends the boisterous ruin. never alone did the king sigh, but with a general groan.", "arm you, i pray you, to this speedy voyage. for we will fetters put upon this fear, which now goes too free-footed."], ["we will haste us.", "my lord, he's going to his mother's closet. behind the arras i'll convey myself to hear the process. i'll warrant she'll tax him home. and, as you said (and wisely was it said) 'tis meet that some more audience than a mother since nature makes them partial should o'erhear the speech, of vantage. fare you well, my liege. i'll call upon you ere you go to bed and tell you what i know.", "thanks, dear my lord.", "oh, my offence is rank. it smells to heaven. it hath the primal eldest curse upon 't, a brother's murder. pray can i not. though inclination be as sharp as will, my stronger guilt defeats my strong intent, and, like a man to double business bound, i stand in pause where i shall first begin, and both neglect. what if this cursd hand were thicker than itself with brother's blood? is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens to wash it white as snow? whereto serves mercy but to confront the visage of offence? and what's in prayer but this twofold force, to be forestalld ere we come to fall or pardoned being down? then i'll look up. my fault is past. but oh, what form of prayer can serve my turn, \"forgive me my foul murder\"?"], ["that cannot be, since i am still possessed of those effects for which i did the murder: my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen. may one be pardoned and retain th' offense? in the corrupted currents of this world offense's gilded hand may shove by justice, and oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself buys out the law. but 'tis not so above. there is no shuffling. there the action lies in his true nature, and we ourselves compelled, even to the teeth and forehead of our faults, to give in evidence. what then? what rests? try what repentance can. what can it not? yet what can it when one can not repent? o wretched state! o bosom black as death! o limd soul that, struggling to be free, art more engaged! help, angels. make assay. bow, stubborn knees, and, heart with strings of steel, be soft as sinews of the newborn babe. all may be well.", "now might i do it pat. now he is a-praying. and now i'll do 't. and so he goes to heaven. and so am i revenged. that would be scanned. a villain kills my father, and, for that, i, his sole son, do this same villain send to heaven. oh, this is hire and salary, not revenge. he took my father grossly, full of bread, with all his crimes broad blown, as flush as may. and how his audit stands who knows save heaven? but in our circumstance and course of thought 'tis heavy with him. and am i then revenged"], ["to take him in the purging of his soul when he is fit and seasoned for his passage? no. up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent. when he is drunk asleep, or in his rage, or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed, at game a-swearing, or about some act that has no relish of salvation in 't then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven, and that his soul may be as damned and black as hell, whereto it goes. my mother stays this physic but prolongs thy sickly days.", "my words fly up, my thoughts remain below. words without thoughts never to heaven go."], ["he will come straight. look you lay home to him. tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with, and that your grace hath screened and stood between much heat and him. i'll silence me even here. pray you, be round with him.", "mother, mother, mother!", "i'll warrant you. fear me not. withdraw, i hear him coming.", "now mother, what's the matter?", "hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.", "mother, you have my father much offended.", "come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.", "go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.", "why, how now, hamlet?", "what's the matter now?", "have you forgot me?", "no, by the rood, not so. you are the queen, your husband's brother's wife, and would it were not so! you are my mother."], ["nay, then i'll set those to you that can speak.", "come, come, and sit you down. you shall not budge. you go not till i set you up a glass where you may see the inmost part of you.", "what wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me? help, help, ho!", "what, ho? help, help, help!", "how now, a rat? dead for a ducat, dead!", "oh, i am slain.", "o me, what hast thou done?", "nay, i know not. is it the king?", "oh, what a rash and bloody deed is this!", "a bloody deed? almost as bad, good mother, as kill a king and marry with his brother.", "as kill a king?", "ay, lady, 'twas my word."], ["thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell. i took thee for thy better. take thy fortune. thou find'st to be too busy is some danger. gertrude leave wringing of your hands. peace. sit you down and let me wring your heart. for so i shall if it be made of penetrable stuff, if damnd custom have not brassed it so that it is proof and bulwark against sense.", "what have i done, that thou darest wag thy tongue in noise so rude against me?", "such an act that blurs the grace and blush of modesty, calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose from the fair forehead of an innocent love and sets a blister there, makes marriage vows as false as dicers' oaths oh, such a deed as from the body of contraction plucks the very soul, and sweet religion makes a rhapsody of words. heaven's face doth glow o'er this solidity and compound mass with tristful visage, as against the doom, is thought-sick at the act.", "ay me, what act that roars so loud and thunders in the index?", "look here upon this picture and on this, the counterfeit presentment of two brothers. see, what a grace was seated on this brow? hyperion's curls, the front of jove himself, an eye like mars to threaten and command, a station like the herald mercury new-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill a combination and a form indeed where every god did seem to set his seal"], ["to give the world assurance of a man. this was your husband. look you now, what follows. here is your husband, like a mildewed ear blasting his wholesome brother. have you eyes? could you on this fair mountain leave to feed and batten on this moor? ha, have you eyes? you cannot call it love, for at your age the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble, and waits upon the judgment. and what judgment would step from this to this? sense sure you have, else could you not have motion. but sure that sense is apoplexed, for madness would not err, nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled, but it reserved some quantity of choice to serve in such a difference. what devil was 't that thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind? eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all, or but a sickly part of one true sense could not so mope. o shame, where is thy blush? rebellious hell, if thou canst mutine in a matron's bones, to flaming youth let virtue be as wax and melt in her own fire. proclaim no shame when the compulsive ardor gives the charge, since frost itself as actively doth burn, and reason panders will.", "o hamlet, speak no more! thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul, and there i see such black and graind spots as will not leave their tinct.", "nay, but to live in the rank sweat of an enseamd bed, stewed in corruption, honeying and making love over the nasty sty"], ["o, speak to me no more! these words like daggers enter in my ears. no more, sweet hamlet.", "a murderer and a villain, a slave that is not twentieth part the tithe of your precedent lord, a vice of kings, a cutpurse of the empire and the rule, that from a shelf the precious diadem stole, and put it in his pocket", "no more!", "a king of shreds and patches", "save me and hover o'er me with your wings, you heavenly guards! what would your gracious figure?", "alas, he's mad!", "do you not come your tardy son to chide, that, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by the important acting of your dread command? o, say!", "do not forget. this visitation is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose. but look, amazement on thy mother sits. o, step between her and her fighting soul. conceit in weakest bodies strongest works. speak to her, hamlet."], ["how is it with you, lady?", "alas, how is 't with you, that you do bend your eye on vacancy and with th' incorporal air do hold discourse? forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep, and, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm, your bedded hair, like life in excrements, starts up and stands on end. o gentle son, upon the heat and flame of thy distemper sprinkle cool patience. whereon do you look?", "on him, on him! look you, how pale he glares! his form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones, would make them capable. ghost do not look upon me, lest with this piteous action you convert my stern effects. then what i have to do will want true color tears perchance for blood.", "to whom do you speak this?", "do you see nothing there?", "nothing at all, yet all that is i see.", "nor did you nothing hear?", "no, nothing but ourselves.", "why, look you there! look how it steals away my father, in his habit as he lived look where he goes, even now, out at the portal!"], ["this the very coinage of your brain. this bodiless creation ecstasy is very cunning in.", "ecstasy? my pulse as yours doth temperately keep time and makes as healthful music. it is not madness that i have uttered. bring me to the test, and i the matter will reword, which madness would gambol from. mother, for love of grace, lay not that flattering unction to your soul that not your trespass but my madness speaks. it will but skin and film the ulcerous place whilst rank corruption, mining all within, infects unseen. confess yourself to heaven. repent what's past. avoid what is to come. and do not spread the compost on the weeds to make them ranker. forgive me this my virtue, for in the fatness of these pursy times virtue itself of vice must pardon beg, yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.", "o hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.", "oh, throw away the worser part of it, and live the purer with the other half. good night but go not to mine uncle's bed. assume a virtue if you have it not. that monster, custom, who all sense doth eat, of habits devil, is angel yet in this: that to the use of actions fair and good he likewise gives a frock or livery that aptly is put on. refrain tonight, and that shall lend a kind of easiness to the next abstinence, the next more easy."], ["for use almost can change the stamp of nature, and either rein the devil or throw him out with wondrous potency. once more, good night, and when you are desirous to be blessed, i'll blessing beg of you. polonius for this same lord, i do repent. but heaven hath pleased it so, to punish me with this and this with me, that i must be their scourge and minister. i will bestow him and will answer well the death i gave him. so, again, good night. i must be cruel only to be kind. thus bad begins and worse remains behind. one word more, good lady", "what shall i do?", "not this, by no means, that i bid you do let the bloat king tempt you again to bed, pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse, and let him, for a pair of reechy kisses or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers, make you to ravel all this matter out: that i essentially am not in madness but mad in craft. 'twere good you let him know, for who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise, would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib, such dear concernings hide? who would do so? no, in despite of sense and secrecy, unpeg the basket on the house's top. let the birds fly, and like the famous ape, to try conclusions, in the basket creep and break your own neck down.", "be thou assured, if words be made of breath and breath of life, i have no life to breathe what thou hast said to me."], ["i must to england, you know that?", "alack, i had forgot. 'tis so concluded on.", "there's letters sealed, and my two schoolfellows, whom i will trust as i will adders fanged, they bear the mandate. they must sweep my way and marshal me to knavery. let it work, for 'tis the sport to have the engineer hoist with his own petard. and 't shall go hard, but i will delve one yard below their mines, and blow them at the moon. oh, 'tis most sweet when in one line two crafts directly meet. polonius this man shall set me packing. i'll lug the guts into the neighbor room. mother, good night. indeed this counselor is now most still, most secret, and most grave who was in life a foolish prating knave. come, sir, to draw toward an end with you. good night, mother."], ["gertrude there's matter in these sighs, these profound heaves. you must translate. 'tis fit we understand them. where is your son?", "rosencrantz guildenstern bestow this place on us a little while.", "ah, my good lord, what have i seen tonight!", "what, gertrude? how does hamlet?", "mad as the sea and wind when both contend which is the mightier. in his lawless fit, behind the arras hearing something stir, whips out his rapier, cries, \"a rat, a rat!\" and in this brainish apprehension kills the unseen good old man.", "o heavy deed! it had been so with us, had we been there. his liberty is full of threats to all to you yourself, to us, to everyone. alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered? it will be laid to us, whose providence should have kept short, restrained and out of haunt, this mad young man. but so much was our love, we would not understand what was most fit,"], ["but, like the owner of a foul disease, to keep it from divulging, let it feed even on the pith of life. where is he gone?", "to draw apart the body he hath killed, o'er whom his very madness, like some ore among a mineral of metals base, shows itself pure. he weeps for what is done.", "o gertrude, come away! the sun no sooner shall the mountains touch but we will ship him hence, and this vile deed we must, with all our majesty and skill, both countenance and excuse. ho, guildenstern!", "friends both, go join you with some further aid. hamlet in madness hath polonius slain, and from his mother's closet hath he dragged him. go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body into the chapel. i pray you, haste in this.", "come, gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends, and let them know both what we mean to do and what's untimely done. so dreaded slander whose whisper o'er the world's diameter, as level as the cannon to his blank, transports the poisoned shot may miss our name and hit the woundless air. oh, come away! my soul is full of discord and dismay."], ["safely stowed.", "hamlet! lord hamlet!", "but soft, what noise? who calls on hamlet? oh, here they come.", "what have you done, my lord, with the dead body?", "compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.", "tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence and bear it to the chapel.", "do not believe it.", "believe what?", "that i can keep your counsel and not mine own. besides, to be demanded of a sponge! what replication should be made by the son of a king?", "take you me for a sponge, my lord?"], ["ay, sir, that soaks up the king's countenance, his rewards, his authorities. but such officers do the king best service in the end. he keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed to be last swallowed. when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry again.", "i understand you not, my lord.", "i am glad of it. a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.", "my lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to the king.", "the body is with the king, but the king is not with the body. the king is a thing", "a thing, my lord?", "of nothing. bring me to him. hide, fox, and all after."], ["i have sent to seek him and to find the body. how dangerous is it that this man goes loose! yet must not we put the strong law on him. he's loved of the distracted multitude, who like not in their judgment, but their eyes. and where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed, but never the offense. to bear all smooth and even, this sudden sending him away must seem deliberate pause. diseases desperate grown by desperate appliance are relieved, or not at all.", "how now, what hath befall'n?", "where the dead body is bestowed, my lord, we cannot get from him.", "but where is he?", "without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.", "bring him before us.", "ho, guildenstern! bring in my lord.", "now, hamlet, where's polonius?"], ["at supper.", "at supper where?", "not where he eats, but where he is eaten. a certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. your worm is your only emperor for diet. we fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots. your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service two dishes, but to one table. that's the end.", "alas, alas!", "a man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.", "what dost you mean by this?", "nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts of a beggar.", "where is polonius?", "in heaven. send hither to see. if your messenger find him not there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. but if indeed you find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the lobby.", "go seek him there.", "he will stay till ye come."], ["hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety which we do tender as we dearly grieve for that which thou hast done must send thee hence with fiery quickness. therefore prepare thyself. the bark is ready and the wind at help, th' associates tend, and everything is bent for england.", "for england?", "ay, hamlet.", "good.", "so is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.", "i see a cherub that sees them. but come, for england. farewell, dear mother.", "thy loving father, hamlet.", "my mother. father and mother is man and wife, man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother. come, for england!", "follow him at foot. tempt him with speed aboard. delay it not. i'll have him hence tonight. away! for everything is sealed and done that else leans on the affair. pray you, make haste.", "and, england, if my love thou hold'st at aught as my great power thereof may give thee sense, since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red after the danish sword and thy free awe"], ["pays homage to us thou mayst not coldly set our sovereign process, which imports at full, by letters congruing to that effect, the present death of hamlet. do it, england, for like the hectic in my blood he rages, and thou must cure me. till i know 'tis done, howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun."], ["go, captain, from me greet the danish king tell him that, by his license, fortinbras craves the conveyance of a promised march over his kingdom. you know the rendezvous. if that his majesty would aught with us, we shall express our duty in his eye, and let him know so.", "i will do 't, my lord.", "go softly on.", "good sir, whose powers are these?", "they are of norway, sir.", "how purposed, sir, i pray you?", "against some part of poland.", "who commands them, sir?", "the nephew to old norway, fortinbras.", "goes it against the main of poland, sir, or for some frontier?"], ["truly to speak, and with no addition, we go to gain a little patch of ground that hath in it no profit but the name. to pay five ducats, five, i would not farm it. nor will it yield to norway or the pole a ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.", "why, then the polack never will defend it.", "yes, it is already garrisoned.", "two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats will not debate the question of this straw. this is th' impostume of much wealth and peace, that inward breaks and shows no cause without why the man dies. i humbly thank you, sir.", "god be wi' you, sir.", "will 't please you go, my lord?", "i'll be with you straight. go a little before.", "how all occasions do inform against me, and spur my dull revenge! what is a man if his chief good and market of his time be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more. sure, he that made us with such large discourse, looking before and after, gave us not that capability and godlike reason to fust in us unused. now, whether it be bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple"], ["of thinking too precisely on th' event a thought which, quartered, hath but one part wisdom and ever three parts coward i do not know why yet i live to say \"this thing's to do,\" sith i have cause and will and strength and means to do 't. examples gross as earth exhort me. witness this army of such mass and charge led by a delicate and tender prince, whose spirit with divine ambition puffed makes mouths at the invisible event, exposing what is mortal and unsure to all that fortune, death, and danger dare, even for an eggshell. rightly to be great is not to stir without great argument, but greatly to find quarrel in a straw when honor's at the stake. how stand i then, that have a father killed, a mother stained, excitements of my reason and my blood, and let all sleep while, to my shame, i see the imminent death of twenty thousand men, that for a fantasy and trick of fame go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot whereon the numbers cannot try the cause, which is not tomb enough and continent to hide the slain? oh, from this time forth, my thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!"], ["i will not speak with her.", "she is importunate, indeed distract. her mood will needs be pitied.", "what would she have?", "she speaks much of her father, says she hears there's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart, spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt that carry but half sense. her speech is nothing, yet the unshaped use of it doth move the hearers to collection. they aim at it, and botch the words up fit to their own thoughts, which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them, indeed would make one think there might be thought, though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.", "'twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.", "let her come in.", "to my sick soul (as sin's true nature is) each toy seems prologue to some great amiss. so full of artless jealousy is guilt, it spills itself in fearing to be spilt."], ["where is the beauteous majesty of denmark?", "how now, ophelia?", ", .", "alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?", "say you? nay, pray you, mark. , , , . oh, ho!", "nay, but, ophelia", "pray you, mark.", "alas, look here, my lord.", ", ."], ["how do you, pretty lady?", "well, god'ield you! they say the owl was a baker's daughter. lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. god be at your table.", "conceit upon her father.", "pray you, let's have no words of this, but when they ask you what it means, say you this: , , , . , . .", "pretty ophelia", "indeed, without an oath i'll make an end on 't: , . . , , ,"], ["how long hath she been thus?", "i hope all will be well. we must be patient, but i cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him i' th' cold ground. my brother shall know of it, and so i thank you for your good counsel. come, my coach! good night, ladies. good night, sweet ladies. good night, good night.", "follow her close. give her good watch, i pray you.", "oh, this is the poison of deep grief. it springs all from her father's death, and now behold! o gertrude, gertrude, when sorrows come, they come not single spies but in battalions. first, her father slain. next, your son gone, and he most violent author of his own just remove. the people muddied, thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers for good polonius' death, and we have done but greenly in hugger-mugger to inter him. poor ophelia divided from herself and her fair judgment, without the which we are pictures, or mere beasts. last and as much containing as all these her brother is in secret come from france, feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds, and wants not buzzers to infect his ear with pestilent speeches of his father's death, wherein necessity, of matter beggared, will nothing stick our person to arraign in ear and ear. o my dear gertrude, this, like to a murdering piece, in many places gives me superfluous death."], ["alack, what noise is this?", "where are my switzers? let them guard the door.", "what is the matter?", "save yourself, my lord. the ocean, overpeering of his list, eats not the flats with more impiteous haste than young laertes, in a riotous head, o'erbears your officers. the rabble call him \"lord\" and as the world were now but to begin, antiquity forgot, custom not known, the ratifiers and props of every word they cry, \"choose we! laertes shall be king!\" caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds: \"laertes shall be king, laertes king!\"", "how cheerfully on the false trail they cry. o, this is counter, you false danish dogs!", "the doors are broke."], ["where is this king? sirs, stand you all without.", "no, let's come in!", "i pray you, give me leave.", "we will, we will.", "i thank you. keep the door. o thou vile king, give me my father!", "calmly, good laertes.", "that drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard, cries \"cuckold!\" to my father, brands the \"harlot\" even here between the chaste unsmirchd brow of my true mother.", "what is the cause, laertes, that thy rebellion looks so giant-like? let him go, gertrude. do not fear our person. there's such divinity doth hedge a king that treason can but peep to what it would, acts little of his will. tell me, laertes, why thou art thus incensed. let him go, gertrude. speak, man.", "where is my father?", "dead.", "but not by him.", "let him demand his fill."], ["how came he dead? i'll not be juggled with. to hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil! conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit! i dare damnation. to this point i stand that both the worlds i give to negligence. let come what comes, only i'll be revenged most thoroughly for my father.", "who shall stay you?", "my will, not all the world. and for my means, i'll husband them so well, they shall go far with little.", "good laertes, if you desire to know the certainty of your dear father's death, is 't writ in your revenge, that, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe, winner and loser?", "none but his enemies.", "will you know them then?", "to his good friends thus wide i'll ope my arms and, like the kind life-rendering pelican, repast them with my blood.", "why, now you speak like a good child and a true gentleman. that i am guiltless of your father's death and am most sensible in grief for it, it shall as level to your judgment pierce as day does to your eye."], ["how now? what noise is that?", "o heat, dry up my brains! tears seven times salt, burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye! by heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight, till our scale turn the beam. o rose of may, dear maid, kind sister, sweet ophelia! o heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits should be as mortal as an old man's life? nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine, it sends some precious instance of itself after the thing it loves.", ", , . fare you well, my dove.", "hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge, it could not move thus.", "you must sing and you, oh, how the wheel becomes it! it is the false steward that stole his master's daughter.", "this nothing's more than matter.", "there's rosemary, that's for remembrance. pray you, love, remember. and there is pansies, that's for thoughts."], ["a document in madness. thoughts and remembrance fitted.", "there's fennel for you, and columbines. there's rue for you, and here's some for me. we may call it \"herb of grace\" o' sundays. oh, you must wear your rue with a difference. there's a daisy. i would give you some violets, but they withered all when my father died. they say he made a good end", "thought and affliction, passion, hell itself, she turns to favor and to prettiness.", ", . . , . , , . and of all christian souls, i pray god. god be wi' ye.", "do you see this, o god?", "laertes, i must commune with your grief, or you deny me right. go but apart, make choice of whom your wisest friends you will. and they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me. if by direct or by collateral hand they find us touched, we will our kingdom give, our crown, our life, and all that we can ours, to you in satisfaction. but if not, be you content to lend your patience to us, and we shall jointly labor with your soul to give it due content."], ["let this be so. his means of death, his obscure funeral no trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones, no noble rite nor formal ostentation cry to be heard as 'twere from heaven to earth, that i must call 't in question.", "so you shall. and where the offense is, let the great ax fall. i pray you, go with me."], ["what are they that would speak with me?", "seafaring men, sir. they say they have letters for you.", "let them come in.", "i do not know from what part of the world i should be greeted, if not from lord hamlet.", "god bless you, sir.", "let him bless thee too.", "he shall, sir, an 't please him. there's a letter for you, sir it comes from the ambassador that was bound for england if your name be horatio, as i am let to know it is. horatio", "\"horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the king. they have letters for him. ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chase. finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled valor, and in the grapple i boarded them. on the instant, they got clear of our ship, so i alone became their prisoner. they have dealt with me like thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did; i am to do a good turn for them."], ["let the king have the letters i have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. i have words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb, yet are they much too light for the bore of the matter. these good fellows will bring thee where i am. rosencrantz and guildenstern hold their course for england. of them i have much to tell thee. fare-well. he that thou knowest thine, hamlet.\" come, i will give you way for these your letters, and do 't the speedier, that you may direct me to him from whom you brought them."], ["now must your conscience my acquaintance seal, and you must put me in your heart for friend, sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear, that he which hath your noble father slain pursued my life.", "it well appears. but tell me why you proceeded not against these feats, so criminal and so capital in nature, as by your safety, wisdom, all things else, you mainly were stirred up.", "oh, for two special reasons, which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed, but yet to me they are strong. the queen his mother lives almost by his looks, and for myself my virtue or my plague, be it either which she's so conjunctive to my life and soul, that, as the star moves not but in his sphere, i could not but by her. the other motive why to a public count i might not go, is the great love the general gender bear him, who, dipping all his faults in their affection, would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone, convert his gyves to graces so that my arrows, too slightly timbered for so loud a wind, would have reverted to my bow again, and not where i had aimed them."], ["and so have i a noble father lost, a sister driven into desperate terms, whose worth, if praises may go back again, stood challenger on mount of all the age for her perfections. but my revenge will come.", "break not your sleeps for that. you must not think that we are made of stuff so flat and dull that we can let our beard be shook with danger and think it pastime. you shortly shall hear more. i loved your father, and we love ourself. and that, i hope, will teach you to imagine", "how now, what news?", "letters, my lord, from hamlet. this to your majesty, this to the queen. claudius", "from hamlet? who brought them?", "sailors, my lord, they say. i saw them not. they were given me by claudio. he received them of him that brought them.", "laertes, you shall hear them. leave us.", "\"high and mighty, you shall know i am set naked on your kingdom. tomorrow shall i beg leave to see your kingly eyes, when i shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return. hamlet.\""], ["what should this mean? are all the rest come back? or is it some abuse, and no such thing?", "know you the hand?", "'tis hamlet's character. \"naked\"? and in a postscript here, he says \"alone.\" can you advise me?", "i'm lost in it, my lord. but let him come. it warms the very sickness in my heart that i shall live and tell him to his teeth, \"thus diddest thou.\"", "if it be so, laertes as how should it be so? how otherwise? will you be ruled by me?", "ay, my lord so you will not o'errule me to a peace.", "to thine own peace. if he be now returned, as checking at his voyage, and that he means no more to undertake it, i will work him to an exploit, now ripe in my devise, under the which he shall not choose but fall. and for his death no wind of blame shall breathe, but even his mother shall uncharge the practice and call it accident.", "my lord, i will be ruled the rather if you could devise it so that i might be the organ."], ["it falls right. you have been talked of since your travel much and that in hamlet's hearing for a quality wherein, they say, you shine. your sum of parts did not together pluck such envy from him as did that one, and that, in my regard, of the unworthiest siege.", "what part is that, my lord?", "a very ribbon in the cap of youth, yet needful too, for youth no less becomes the light and careless livery that it wears than settled age his sables and his weeds, importing health and graveness. two months since, here was a gentleman of normandy. i've seen myself, and served against, the french, and they can well on horseback. but this gallant had witchcraft in 't. he grew unto his seat, and to such wondrous doing brought his horse as he had been encorpsed and demi-natured with the brave beast. so far he topped my thought, that i, in forgery of shapes and tricks, come short of what he did.", "a norman was 't?", "a norman.", "upon my life, lamond!", "the very same.", "i know him well. he is the brooch indeed and gem of all the nation."], ["he made confession of you, and gave you such a masterly report for art and exercise in your defense, and for your rapier most especially, that he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed if one could match you. the 'scrimers of their nation, he swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye, if you opposed them. sir, this report of his did hamlet so envenom with his envy that he could nothing do but wish and beg your sudden coming o'er, to play with him. now, out of this", "what out of this, my lord?", "laertes, was your father dear to you? or are you like the painting of a sorrow, a face without a heart?", "why ask you this?", "not that i think you did not love your father but that i know love is begun by time, and that i see, in passages of proof, time qualifies the spark and fire of it. there lives within the very flame of love a kind of wick or snuff that will abate it. and nothing is at a like goodness still. for goodness, growing to a pleurisy, dies in his own too-much. that we would do, we should do when we would, for this \"would\" changes and hath abatements and delays as many as there are tongues, are hands, are accidents. and then this \"should\" is like a spendthrift sigh that hurts by easing. but to the quick of th' ulcer: hamlet comes back. what would you undertake to show yourself in deed your father's son more than in words?"], ["to cut his throat i' th' church.", "no place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize. revenge should have no bounds. but, good laertes, will you do this, keep close within your chamber. hamlet returned shall know you are come home. we'll put on those shall praise your excellence and set a double varnish on the fame the frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together and wager on your heads. he, being remiss, most generous and free from all contriving, will not peruse the foils; so that, with ease, or with a little shuffling, you may choose a sword unbated, and in a pass of practice requite him for your father.", "i will do 't. and for that purpose i'll anoint my sword. i bought an unction of a mountebank, so mortal that, but dip a knife in it, where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare, collected from all simples that have virtue under the moon, can save the thing from death that is but scratched withal. i'll touch my point with this contagion, that if i gall him slightly it may be death.", "let's further think of this, weigh what convenience both of time and means may fit us to our shape. if this should fail, and that our drift look through our bad performance, 'twere better not assayed. therefore this project"], ["should have a back or second that might hold if this should blast in proof. soft, let me see. we'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings. i ha 't! when in your motion you are hot and dry, as make your bouts more violent to that end, and that he calls for drink, i'll have prepared him a chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping, if he by chance escape your venomed stuck, our purpose may hold there. but stay, what noise?", "one woe doth tread upon another's heel, so fast they follow. your sister's drowned, laertes.", "drowned? oh, where?", "there is a willow grows aslant a brook that shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream. there with fantastic garlands did she come of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples, that liberal shepherds give a grosser name, but our cold maids do \"dead men's fingers\" call them. there, on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke, when down her weedy trophies and herself fell in the weeping brook. her clothes spread wide, and mermaid-like a while they bore her up, which time she chanted snatches of old lauds as one incapable of her own distress, or like a creature native and indued unto that element. but long it could not be till that her garments, heavy with their drink, pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay to muddy death."], ["alas, then she is drowned.", "drowned, drowned.", "too much of water hast thou, poor ophelia, and therefore i forbid my tears. but yet it is our trick. nature her custom holds, let shame say what it will. when these are gone, the woman will be out. adieu, my lord. i have a speech of fire that fain would blaze, but that this folly doubts it.", "let's follow, gertrude. how much i had to do to calm his rage! now fear i this will give it start again. therefore let's follow."], ["is she to be buried in christian burial when she willfully seeks her own salvation?", "i tell thee she is. therefore make her grave straight. the crowner hath sat on her and finds it christian burial.", "how can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own defense?", "why, 'tis found so.", "it must be . it cannot be else. for here lies the point: if i drown myself wittingly, it argues an act. and an act hath three branches it is to act, to do, to perform. argal, she drowned herself wittingly.", "nay, but hear you, goodman delver", "give me leave. here lies the water. good. here stands the man. good. if the man go to this water and drown himself, it is, will he nill he, he goes. mark you that. but if the water come to him and drown him, he drowns not himself. argal, he that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.", "but is this law?"], ["ay, marry, is 't. crowner's quest law.", "will you ha' the truth on 't? if this had not been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' christian burial.", "why, there thou sayst. and the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves more than their even christian. come, my spade. there is no ancient gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers. they hold up adam's profession.", "was he a gentleman?", "he was the first that ever bore arms.", "why, he had none.", "what, art a heathen? how dost thou understand the scripture? the scripture says adam digged. could he dig without arms? i'll put another question to thee. if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess thyself", "go to.", "what is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?", "the gallows-maker, for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.", "i like thy wit well, in good faith. the gallows does well, but how does it well? it does well to those that do ill."], ["now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church. argal, the gallows may do well to thee. to 't again, come.", "\"who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?\"", "ay, tell me that, and unyoke.", "marry, now i can tell.", "to 't.", "mass, i cannot tell.", "cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating. and when you are asked this question next, say \"a grave-maker.\" the houses that he makes last till doomsday. go, get thee in. fetch me a stoup of liquor.", ", , .", "has this fellow no feeling of his business? he sings at grave- making."], ["custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.", "'tis e'en so. the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.", ", .", "that skull had a tongue in it and could sing once. how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were cain's jawbone, that did the first murder! it might be the pate of a politician, which this ass now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent god, might it not?", "it might, my lord.", "or of a courtier, which could say, \"good morrow, sweet lord!\" \"how dost thou, good lord?\" this might be my lord such-a-one that praised my lord such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it, might it not?", "ay, my lord.", "why, e'en so. and now my lady worm's, chapless and knocked about the mazard with a sexton's spade. here's fine revolution, an we had the trick to see 't. did these bones cost no more the breeding but to play at loggets with them? mine ache to think on 't."], [", , .", "there's another. why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? where be his quiddities now, his quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell him of his action of battery? hum! this fellow might be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. is this the fine of his fines and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? the very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box, and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?", "not a jot more, my lord.", "is not parchment made of sheepskins?", "ay, my lord, and of calfskins too.", "they are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. i will speak to this fellow. whose grave's this, sirrah?", "mine, sir."], [".", "i think it be thine, indeed, for thou liest in 't.", "you lie out on 't, sir, and therefore it is not yours. for my part, i do not lie in 't, and yet it is mine.", "thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine. 'tis for the dead, not for the quick. therefore thou liest.", "'tis a quick lie, sir. 'twill away gain from me to you.", "what man dost thou dig it for?", "for no man, sir.", "what woman, then?", "for none, neither.", "who is to be buried in 't?", "one that was a woman, sir, but, rest her soul, she's dead.", "how absolute the knave is! we must speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us. by the lord, horatio, these three years i have taken a note of it. the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls his kibe. how long hast thou been a grave-maker?", "of all the days i' the year, i came to 't that day that our last king hamlet overcame fortinbras."], ["how long is that since?", "cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that. it was the very day that young hamlet was born, he that is mad and sent into england.", "ay, marry, why was he sent into england?", "why, because he was mad. he shall recover his wits there, or, if he do not, it's no great matter there.", "why?", "'twill not be seen in him there. there the men are as mad as he.", "how came he mad?", "very strangely, they say.", "how \"strangely\"?", "faith, e'en with losing his wits.", "upon what ground?", "why, here in denmark. i have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.", "how long will a man lie i' the earth ere he rot?"], ["faith, if he be not rotten before he die as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will scarce hold the laying in he will last you some eight year or nine year. a tanner will last you nine year.", "why he more than another?", "why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade that he will keep out water a great while, and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body. here's a skull now. this skull has lain in the earth three-and-twenty years.", "whose was it?", "a whoreson mad fellow's it was. whose do you think it was?", "nay, i know not.", "a pestilence on him for a mad rogue! he poured a flagon of rhenish on my head once. this same skull, sir, was yorick's skull, the king's jester.", "this?", "e'en that.", "let me see. alas, poor yorick! i knew him, horatio, a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. he hath borne me on his back a thousand times, and now, how abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rises at it. here hung those lips that i have kissed i know not how oft. where be your gibes now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to set the table on a roar? not one now to mock your own grinning? quite chapfallen? now get you to my lady's chamber and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favor she must come. make her laugh at that. prithee, horatio, tell me one thing."], ["what's that, my lord?", "dost thou think alexander looked o' this fashion i' th' earth?", "e'en so.", "and smelt so? pah!", "e'en so, my lord.", "to what base uses we may return, horatio. why may not imagination trace the noble dust of alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?", "'twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.", "no, faith, not a jot. but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it, as thus: alexander died, alexander was buried, alexander returneth to dust, the dust is earth, of earth we make loam and why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer barrel? imperious caesar, dead and turned to clay, might stop a hole to keep the wind away. oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe, should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw! but soft, but soft a while.", "here comes the king, the queen, the courtiers who is this they follow, and with such maimd rites? this doth betoken the corse they follow did with desperate hand fordo its own life. 'twas of some estate. couch we a while and mark."], ["what ceremony else?", "that is laertes, a very noble youth, mark.", "what ceremony else?", "her obsequies have been as far enlarged as we have warranty. her death was doubtful, and, but that great command o'ersways the order, she should in ground unsanctified have lodged till the last trumpet. for charitable prayers shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her. yet here she is allowed her virgin crants, her maiden strewments, and the bringing home of bell and burial.", "must there no more be done?", "no more be done. we should profane the service of the dead to sing a requiem and such rest to her as to peace-parted souls.", "lay her i' th' earth, and from her fair and unpolluted flesh may violets spring! i tell thee, churlish priest, a ministering angel shall my sister be when thou liest howling.", "horatio what, the fair ophelia?"], ["sweets to the sweet. farewell! i hoped thou shouldst have been my hamlet's wife. i thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid, and not have strewed thy grave.", "oh, treble woe fall ten times treble on that cursd head, whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense deprived thee of! hold off the earth awhile till i have caught her once more in mine arms.", "now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, till of this flat a mountain you have made, t' o'ertop old pelion or the skyish head of blue olympus.", "what is he whose grief bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand like wonder-wounded hearers? this is i, hamlet the dane.", "the devil take thy soul!", "thou pray'st not well. i prithee, take thy fingers from my throat, for though i am not splenitive and rash, yet have i something in me dangerous, which let thy wisdom fear. hold off thy hand.", "pluck them asunder."], ["hamlet, hamlet!", "gentlemen", "hamlet good my lord, be quiet.", "why, i will fight with him upon this theme until my eyelids will no longer wag.", "o my son, what theme?", "i loved ophelia. forty thousand brothers could not with all their quantity of love make up my sum. what wilt thou do for her?", "o, he is mad, laertes.", "for love of god, forbear him.", "'swounds, show me what thou'lt do. woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself? woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile? i'll do 't. dost thou come here to whine, to outface me with leaping in her grave? be buried quick with her? and so will i. and if thou prate of mountains let them throw millions of acres on us, till our ground, singeing his pate against the burning zone, make ossa like a wart! nay, an thou'lt mouth, i'll rant as well as thou.", "this is mere madness. and thus a while the fit will work on him. anon, as patient as the female dove when that her golden couplets are disclosed, his silence will sit drooping."], ["hear you, sir. what is the reason that you use me thus? i loved you ever. but it is no matter. let hercules himself do what he may, the cat will mew and dog will have his day.", "i pray thee, good horatio, wait upon him.", "laertes strengthen your patience in our last night's speech. we'll put the matter to the present push. good gertrude, set some watch over your son. this grave shall have a living monument. an hour of quiet shortly shall we see. till then in patience our proceeding be."], ["so much for this, sir. now shall you see the other. you do remember all the circumstance?", "remember it, my lord?", "sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting that would not let me sleep. methought i lay worse than the mutines in the bilboes. rashly and praised be rashness for it: let us know our indiscretion sometimes serves us well when our deep plots do pall, and that should teach us there's a divinity that shapes our ends, rough-hew them how we will", "that is most certain.", "up from my cabin, my sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark groped i to find out them, had my desire, fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew to mine own room again, making so bold (my fears forgetting manners) to unseal their grand commission, where i found, horatio o royal knavery! an exact command, larded with many several sorts of reasons importing denmark's health, and england's too, with ho! such bugs and goblins in my life that, on the supervise (no leisure bated, no, not to stay the grinding of the ax) my head should be struck off."], ["is 't possible?", "horatio here's the commission. read it at more leisure. but wilt thou hear me how i did proceed?", "i beseech you.", "being thus benetted round with villainies ere i could make a prologue to my brains, they had begun the play i sat me down, devised a new commission, wrote it fair. i once did hold it, as our statists do, a baseness to write fair, and labored much how to forget that learning, but, sir, now it did me yeoman's service. wilt thou know th' effect of what i wrote?", "ay, good my lord.", "an earnest conjuration from the king, as england was his faithful tributary, as love between them like the palm might flourish, as peace should stiff her wheaten garland wear and stand a comma 'tween their amities, and many suchlike \"as's\" of great charge, that, on the view and knowing of these contents, without debatement further, more or less, he should the bearers put to sudden death, not shriving time allowed.", "how was this sealed?"], ["why, even in that was heaven ordinant. i had my father's signet in my purse, which was the model of that danish seal. folded the writ up in form of th' other, subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it safely, the changeling never known. now, the next day was our sea fight, and what to this was sequent thou know'st already.", "so guildenstern and rosencrantz go to 't.", "why, man, they did make love to this employment. they are not near my conscience. their defeat does by their own insinuation grow. 'tis dangerous when the baser nature comes between the pass and fell incensd points of mighty opposites.", "why, what a king is this!", "does it not, think thee, stand me now upon he that hath killed my king and whored my mother, popped in between th' election and my hopes, thrown out his angle for my proper life (and with such cozenage!) is 't not perfect conscience to quit him with this arm? and is 't not to be damned to let this canker of our nature come in further evil?", "it must be shortly known to him from england what is the issue of the business there."], ["it will be short. the interim's mine. and a man's life's no more than to say \"one.\" but i am very sorry, good horatio, that to laertes i forgot myself, for by the image of my cause i see the portraiture of his. i'll court his favors. but sure the bravery of his grief did put me into a towering passion.", "peace. who comes here?", "your lordship is right welcome back to denmark.", "i humbly thank you, sir. horatio dost know this water-fly?", "hamlet no, my good lord.", "horatio thy state is the more gracious, for 'tis a vice to know him. he hath much land, and fertile. let a beast be lord of beasts and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'tis a chough, but, as i say, spacious in the possession of dirt.", "sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, i should impart a thing to you from his majesty.", "i will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. put your bonnet to his right use. 'tis for the head.", "i thank your lordship. it is very hot."], ["no, believe me, 'tis very cold. the wind is northerly.", "it is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.", "but yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.", "exceedingly, my lord. it is very sultry as 'twere i cannot tell how. my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head. sir, this is the matter", "i beseech you, remember osric", "nay, good my lord, for mine ease, in good faith. sir, here is newly come to court laertes, believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing. indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.", "sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you, though i know to divide him inventorially would dizzy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail."], ["but in the verity of extolment, i take him to be a soul of great article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror. and who else would trace him? his umbrage, nothing more.", "your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.", "the concernancy, sir? why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawer breath?", "sir?", "hamlet is 't not possible to understand in another tongue? you will do 't, sir, really.", "what imports the nomination of this gentleman?", "of laertes?", "hamlet his purse is empty already. all 's golden words are spent.", "of him, sir.", "i know you are not ignorant", "i would you did, sir. yet in faith, if you did, it would not much approve me. well, sir?", "you are not ignorant of what excellence laertes is"], ["i dare not confess that lest i should compare with him in excellence, but to know a man well were to know himself.", "i mean, sir, for his weapon. but in the imputation laid on him by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.", "what's his weapon?", "rapier and dagger.", "that's two of his weapons. but well.", "the king, sir, hath wagered with him six barbary horses, against the which he has impawned, as i take it, six french rapiers and poniards with their assigns as girdle, hangers, and so. three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.", "what call you the carriages?", "hamlet i knew you must be edified by the margin ere you had done.", "the carriages, sir, are the hangers.", "the phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could carry cannon by our sides. i would it might be hangers till then. but, on: six barbary horses against six french swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages that's the french bet against the danish. why is this \"impawned,\" as you call it?", "the king, sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes between yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits. he hath laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer."], ["how if i answer \"no\"?", "i mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.", "sir, i will walk here in the hall. if it please his majesty, 'tis the breathing time of day with me. let the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold his purpose. i will win for him an i can. if not, i will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.", "shall i redeliver you e'en so?", "to this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.", "i commend my duty to your lordship.", "yours, yours.", "he does well to commend it himself. there are no tongues else for 's turn.", "this lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.", "he did comply, sir, with his dug before he sucked it. thus has he and many more of the same bevy that i know the drossy age dotes on only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out."], ["my lord, his majesty commended him to you by young osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in the hall. he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with laertes, or that you will take longer time.", "i am constant to my purpose. they follow the king's pleasure. if his fitness speaks, mine is ready, now or whensoever, provided i be so able as now.", "the king and queen and all are coming down.", "in happy time.", "the queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to laertes before you fall to play.", "she well instructs me.", "you will lose this wager, my lord.", "i do not think so. since he went into france, i have been in continual practice. i shall win at the odds. but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here about my heart. but it is no matter.", "nay, good my lord", "it is but foolery, but it is such a kind of gain-giving as would perhaps trouble a woman."], ["if your mind dislike anything, obey it. i will forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.", "not a whit. we defy augury. there's a special providence in the fall of a sparrow. if it be now, 'tis not to come. if it be not to come, it will be now. if it be not now, yet it will come the readiness is all. since no man of aught he leaves knows, what is 't to leave betimes? let be.", "come, hamlet, come, and take this hand from me. laertes' hamlet'", "give me your pardon, sir. i've done you wrong. but pardon 't, as you are a gentleman. this presence knows, and you must needs have heard, how i am punished with sore distraction. what i have done, that might your nature, honor, and exception roughly awake, i here proclaim was madness. was 't hamlet wronged laertes? never hamlet. if hamlet from himself be ta'en away, and when he's not himself does wrong laertes, then hamlet does it not. hamlet denies it. who does it, then? his madness. if't be so, hamlet is of the faction that is wronged. his madness is poor hamlet's enemy. sir, in this audience,"], ["let my disclaiming from a purposed evil free me so far in your most generous thoughts that i have shot mine arrow o'er the house and hurt my brother.", "i am satisfied in nature, whose motive in this case should stir me most to my revenge. but in my terms of honor i stand aloof, and will no reconcilement till by some elder masters, of known honor, i have a voice and precedent of peace to keep my name ungored. but till that time i do receive your offered love like love and will not wrong it.", "i embrace it freely, and will this brother's wager frankly play. give us the foils. come on.", "come, one for me.", "i'll be your foil, laertes. in mine ignorance your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night, stick fiery off indeed.", "you mock me, sir.", "no, by this hand.", "give them the foils, young osric. cousin hamlet, you know the wager?", "very well, my lord. your grace hath laid the odds o' th' weaker side."], ["i do not fear it. i have seen you both. but since he is better we have therefore odds.", "this is too heavy. let me see another.", "this likes me well. these foils have all a length?", "ay, my good lord.", "set me the stoups of wine upon that table. if hamlet give the first or second hit or quit in answer of the third exchange, let all the battlements their ordnance fire! the king shall drink to hamlet's better breath, and in the cup an union shall he throw richer than that which four successive kings in denmark's crown have worn. give me the cups. and let the kettle to the trumpet speak, the trumpet to the cannoneer without, the cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, \"now the king dunks to hamlet.\" come, begin. and you, the judges, bear a wary eye.", "come on, sir.", "come, my lord."], ["one.", "no.", "judgment?", "a hit, a very palpable hit.", "well, again.", "stay, give me drink. hamlet, this pearl is thine. here's to thy health.", "give him the cup.", "i'll play this bout first. set it by a while. come.", "another hit. what say you?", "a touch, a touch, i do confess 't.", "our son shall win.", "he's fat, and scant of breath. here, hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows. the queen carouses to thy fortune, hamlet."], ["good madam.", "gertrude, do not drink.", "i will, my lord. i pray you, pardon me.", "it is the poisoned cup. it is too late.", "i dare not drink yet, madam. by and by.", "come, let me wipe thy face.", "claudius my lord, i'll hit him now.", "i do not think 't.", "and yet it is almost 'gainst my conscience.", "come, for the third, laertes. you do but dally. i pray you, pass with your best violence. i am afeard you make a wanton of me.", "say you so? come on.", "nothing, neither way.", "have at you now!", "part them! they are incensed."], ["nay, come, again.", "look to the queen there, ho!", "they bleed on both sides. how is it, my lord?", "how is 't, laertes?", "why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, osric. i am justly killed with mine own treachery.", "how does the queen?", "she swoons to see them bleed.", "no, no, the drink, the drink! o my dear hamlet! the drink, the drink! i am poisoned.", "o villainy! ho, let the door be locked.", "treachery! seek it out.", "it is here, hamlet. hamlet, thou art slain. no medicine in the world can do thee good. in thee there is not half an hour of life. the treacherous instrument is in thy hand, unbated and envenomed. the foul practice hath turned itself on me. lo, here i lie, never to rise again. thy mother's poisoned. i can no more. the king, the king's to blame.", "the point envenomed too! then, venom, to thy work."], ["treason! treason!", "o, yet defend me, friends. i am but hurt.", "here, thou incestuous, murderous, damnd dane, drink off this potion. is thy union here? follow my mother.", "he is justly served. it is a poison tempered by himself. exchange forgiveness with me, noble hamlet. mine and my father's death come not upon thee, nor thine on me.", "heaven make thee free of it. i follow thee. i am dead, horatio. wretched queen, adieu! you that look pale and tremble at this chance, that are but mutes or audience to this act, had i but time (as this fell sergeant, death, is strict in his arrest), o, i could tell you but let it be. horatio, i am dead. thou livest. report me and my cause aright to the unsatisfied.", "never believe it. i am more an antique roman than a dane. here's yet some liquor left."], ["as thou'rt a man, give me the cup. let go! by heaven, i'll have 't. horatio o god, horatio, what a wounded name, things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me! if thou didst ever hold me in thy heart absent thee from felicity a while, and in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain to tell my story.", "what warlike noise is this?", "young fortinbras, with conquest come from poland, to th' ambassadors of england gives this warlike volley.", "o, i die, horatio. the potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit. i cannot live to hear the news from england. but i do prophesy the election lights on fortinbras. he has my dying voice. so tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less, which have solicited. the rest is silence. o, o, o, o.", "now cracks a noble heart. good night, sweet prince, and flights of angels sing thee to thy rest! why does the drum come hither?"], ["where is this sight?", "what is it ye would see? if aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.", "this quarry cries on havoc. o proud death, what feast is toward in thine eternal cell, that thou so many princes at a shot so bloodily hast struck?", "the sight is dismal, and our affairs from england come too late. the ears are senseless that should give us hearing, to tell him his commandment is fulfilled, that rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead. where should we have our thanks?", "claudius not from his mouth, had it th' ability of life to thank you. he never gave commandment for their death. but since so jump upon this bloody question, you from the polack wars, and you from england, are here arrived, give order that these bodies high on a stage be placd to the view, and let me speak to th' yet-unknowing world how these things came about. so shall you hear of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, and, in this upshot, purposes mistook fall'n on th' inventors' heads. all this can i truly deliver.", "let us haste to hear it, and call the noblest to the audience. for me, with sorrow i embrace my fortune. i have some rights of memory in this kingdom, which now to claim my vantage doth invite me."], ["of that i shall have also cause to speak, and from his mouth whose voice will draw on more. but let this same be presently performed, even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance on plots and errors happen.", "let four captains bear hamlet like a soldier to the stage, for he was likely, had he been put on, to have proved most royally. and, for his passage, the soldiers' music and the rites of war speak loudly for him. take up the bodies. such a sight as this becomes the field, but here shows much amiss. go, bid the soldiers shoot."]], [], [], [["oh, for a muse of fire that would ascend the brightest heaven of invention! a kingdom for a stage, princes to act, and monarchs to behold the swelling scene! then should the warlike harry, like himself, assume the port of mars, and at his heels, leashed in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire crouch for employment. but pardon, gentles all, the flat unraisd spirits that hath dared on this unworthy scaffold to bring forth so great an object. can this cockpit hold the vasty fields of france? or may we cram within this wooden the very casques that did affright the air at agincourt? o pardon, since a crookd figure may attest in little place a million, and let us, ciphers to this great account, on your imaginary forces work. suppose within the girdle of these walls are now confined two mighty monarchies whose high upreard and abutting fronts the perilous narrow ocean parts asunder. piece out our imperfections with your thoughts. into a thousand parts divide one man, and make imaginary puissance. think, when we talk of horses, that you see them printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth, for 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings, carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,"], ["turning th' accomplishment of many years into an hour-glass; for the which supply, admit me chorus to this history; who, prologue-like, your humble patience pray gently to hear, kindly to judge our play."], ["my lord, i'll tell you that self bill is urged which in th' eleventh year of the last king's reign was like, and had indeed against us passed but that the scambling and unquiet time did push it out of farther question.", "but how, my lord, shall we resist it now?", "it must be thought on. if it pass against us, we lose the better half of our possession, for all the temporal lands which men devout by testament have given to the church would they strip from us, being valued thus: \"as much as would maintain, to the king's honor, full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, six thousand and two hundred good esquires; and, to relief of lazars and weak age of indigent faint souls past corporal toil, a hundred almshouses right well supplied; and to the coffers of the king besides, a thousand pounds by th' year.\" thus runs the bill.", "this would drink deep.", "'twould drink the cup and all.", "but what prevention?", "the king is full of grace and fair regard.", "and a true lover of the holy church."], ["the courses of his youth promised it not. the breath no sooner left his father's body but that his wildness, mortified in him, seemed to die too. yea, at that very moment consideration like an angel came and whipped th' offending adam out of him, leaving his body as a paradise t' envelop and contain celestial spirits. never was such a sudden scholar made, never came reformation in a flood with such a heady currance scouring faults, nor never hydra-headed willfulness so soon did lose his seat, and all at once, as in this king.", "we are blessd in the change.", "hear him but reason in divinity and, all-admiring, with an inward wish, you would desire the king were made a prelate. hear him debate of commonwealth affairs, you would say it hath been all in all his study. list his discourse of war, and you shall hear a fearful battle rendered you in music. turn him to any cause of policy, the gordian knot of it he will unloose familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks, the air, a chartered libertine, is still, and the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears to steal his sweet and honeyed sentences; so that the art and practic part of life must be the mistress to this theoric; which is a wonder how his grace should glean it, since his addiction was to courses vain, his companies unlettered, rude, and shallow, his hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports, and never noted in him any study, any retirement, any sequestration from open haunts and popularity."], ["the strawberry grows underneath the nettle, and wholesome berries thrive and ripen best neighbored by fruit of baser quality; and so the prince obscured his contemplation under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt, grew like the summer grass, fastest by night, unseen yet crescive in his faculty.", "it must be so, for miracles are ceased, and therefore we must needs admit the means how things are perfected.", "but, my good lord, how now for mitigation of this bill urged by the commons? doth his majesty incline to it or no?", "he seems indifferent, or rather swaying more upon our part than cherishing th' exhibitors against us; for i have made an offer to his majesty upon our spiritual convocation and in regard of causes now in hand, which i have opened to his grace at large, as touching france to give a greater sum than ever at one time the clergy yet did to his predecessors part withal.", "how did this offer seem received, my lord?"], ["with good acceptance of his majesty save that there was not time enough to hear, as i perceived his grace would fain have done, the severals and unhidden passages of his true titles to some certain dukedoms, and generally to the crown and seat of france, derived from edward, his great-grandfather.", "what was th' impediment that broke this off?", "the french ambassador upon that instant craved audience. and the hour, i think, is come to give him hearing. is it four o'clock?", "it is.", "then go we in to know his embassy, which i could with a ready guess declare before the frenchman speak a word of it.", "i'll wait upon you, and i long to hear it."], ["where is my gracious lord of canterbury?", "not here in presence.", "send for him, good uncle.", "shall we call in th' ambassador, my liege?", "not yet, my cousin. we would be resolved, before we hear him, of some things of weight that task our thoughts concerning us and france.", "god and his angels guard your sacred throne and make you long become it.", "sure we thank you. my learnd lord, we pray you to proceed and justly and religiously unfold why the law salic that they have in france or should or should not bar us in our claim. and god forbid, my dear and faithful lord, that you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading, or nicely charge your understanding soul with opening titles miscreate, whose right suits not in native colors with the truth; for god doth know how many now in health shall drop their blood in approbation"], ["of what your reverence shall incite us to. therefore take heed how you impawn our person, how you awake our sleeping sword of war. we charge you in the name of god, take heed, for never two such kingdoms did contend without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops are every one a woe, a sore complaint 'gainst him whose wrong gives edge unto the swords that make such waste in brief mortality. under this conjuration, speak, my lord, for we will hear, note, and believe in heart that what you speak is in your conscience washed as pure as sin with baptism.", "then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers that owe yourselves, your lives, and services to this imperial throne. there is no bar to make against your highness' claim to france but this, which they produce from pharamond: (no woman shall succeed in salic land), which salic land the french unjustly gloze to be the realm of france, and pharamond the founder of this law and female bar. yet their own authors faithfully affirm that the land salic is in germany, between the floods of sala and of elbe, where charles the great, having subdued the saxons, there left behind and settled certain french, who, holding in disdain the german women for some dishonest manners of their life, established then this law: to wit, no female should be inheritrix in salic land, which \"salic,\" as i said, 'twixt elbe and sala is at this day in germany called meissen."], ["then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers that owe yourselves, your lives, and services to this imperial throne. there is no bar to make against your highness' claim to france but this, which they produce from pharamond: (no woman shall succeed in salic land), which salic land the french unjustly gloze to be the realm of france, and pharamond the founder of this law and female bar. yet their own authors faithfully affirm that the land salic is in germany, between the floods of sala and of elbe, where charles the great, having subdued the saxons, there left behind and settled certain french, who, holding in disdain the german women for some dishonest manners of their life, established then this law: to wit, no female should be inheritrix in salic land, which \"salic,\" as i said, 'twixt elbe and sala is at this day in germany called meissen. then doth it well appear the salic law was not devisd for the realm of france, nor did the french possess the salic land until four hundred one and twenty years after defunction of king pharamond, idly supposed the founder of this law; who died within the year of our redemption four hundred twenty-six; and charles the great subdued the saxons and did seat the french beyond the river sala in the year eight hundred five. besides, their writers say, king pepin, which deposd childeric, did, as heir general, being descended of blithild, which was daughter to king clothair, make claim and title to the crown of france. hugh capet also, who usurped the crown of charles the duke of lorraine, sole heir male of the true line and stock of charles the great, to find his title with some shows of truth, though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught, conveyed himself as th' heir to th' lady lingare, daughter to charlemagne, who was the son to lewis the emperor, and lewis the son of charles the great. also king lewis the tenth, who was sole heir to the usurper capet, could not keep quiet in his conscience, wearing the crown of france, till satisfied that fair queen isabel, his grandmother, was lineal of the lady ermengare, daughter to charles the foresaid duke of lorraine, by the which marriage the line of charles the great was reunited to the crown of france. so that, as clear as is the summer's sun, king pepin's title and hugh capet's claim, king lewis his satisfaction, all appear to hold in right and title of the female."], ["so do the kings of france unto this day, howbeit they would hold up this salic law to bar your highness claiming from the female and rather choose to hide them in a net than amply to imbar their crooked titles usurped from you and your progenitors.", "may i with right and conscience make this claim?", "the sin upon my head, dread sovereign, for in the book of numbers is it writ: \"when the man dies, let the inheritance descend unto the daughter.\" gracious lord, stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag, look back into your mighty ancestors. go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire's tomb, from whom you claim. invoke his warlike spirit and your great-uncle's, edward the black prince, who on the french ground played a tragedy, making defeat on the full power of france whiles his most mighty father on a hill stood smiling to behold his lion's whelp forage in blood of french nobility. o noble english, that could entertain with half their forces the full pride of france and let another half stand laughing by, all out of work and cold for action!", "awake remembrance of these valiant dead and with your puissant arm renew their feats. you are their heir, you sit upon their throne, the blood and courage that renownd them runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege is in the very may-morn of his youth, ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises."], ["your brother kings and monarchs of the earth do all expect that you should rouse yourself as did the former lions of your blood.", "they know your grace hath cause and means and might; so hath your highness. never king of england had nobles richer, and more loyal subjects, whose hearts have left their bodies here in england and lie pavilioned in the fields of france.", "oh, let their bodies follow, my dear liege, with blood and sword and fire to win your right, in aid whereof we of the spiritualty will raise your highness such a mighty sum as never did the clergy at one time bring in to any of your ancestors.", "we must not only arm t' invade the french, but lay down our proportions to defend against the scot, who will make road upon us with all advantages.", "they of those marches, gracious sovereign, shall be a wall sufficient to defend our inland from the pilfering borderers.", "we do not mean the coursing snatchers only, but fear the main intendment of the scot, who hath been still a giddy neighbor to us. for you shall read that my great-grandfather never went with his forces into france but that the scot on his unfurnished kingdom came pouring like the tide into a breach with ample and brim fullness of his force, galling the gleand land with hot assays, girding with grievous siege castles and towns, that england, being empty of defense, hath shook and trembled at th' ill neighborhood."], ["she hath been then more feared than harmed, my liege, for hear her but exampled by herself: when all her chivalry hath been in france and she a mourning widow of her nobles, she hath herself not only well defended but taken and impounded as a stray the king of scots, whom she did send to france to fill king edward's fame with prisoner kings and make her chronicle as rich with praise as is the ooze and bottom of the sea with sunken wrack and sumless treasuries.", "but there's a saying very old and true: \"if that you will france win, then with scotland first begin.\" for once the eagle england being in prey, to her unguarded nest the weasel scot comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs, playing the mouse in absence of the cat, to 'tame and havoc more than she can eat.", "it follows, then, the cat must stay at home. yet that is but a crushed necessity, since we have locks to safeguard necessaries and pretty traps to catch the petty thieves. while that the armd hand doth fight abroad, th' advisd head defends itself at home. for government, though high and low and lower, put into parts, doth keep in one consent, congreeing in a full and natural close, like music."], ["therefore doth heaven divide the state of man in diverse functions, setting endeavor in continual motion, to which is fixd as an aim or butt obedience; for so work the honeybees, creatures that by a rule in nature teach the act of order to a peopled kingdom. they have a king and officers of sorts, where some like magistrates correct at home, others like merchants venture trade abroad, others like soldiers armd in their stings make boot upon the summer's velvet buds, which pillage they with merry march bring home to the tent royal of their emperor, who, busied in his majesty, surveys the singing masons building roofs of gold, the civil citizens kneading up the honey, the poor mechanic porters crowding in their heavy burdens at his narrow gate, the sad-eyed justice with his surly hum delivering o'er to executors pale the lazy yawning drone. i this infer: that many things, having full reference to one consent, may work contrariously, as many arrows loosd several ways come to one mark, as many ways meet in one town, as many fresh streams meet in one salt sea, as many lines close in the dial's center, so may a thousand actions, once afoot, end in one purpose, and be all well borne without defeat. therefore to france, my liege! divide your happy england into four, whereof take you one quarter into france, and you withal shall make all gallia shake."], ["if we, with thrice such powers left at home, cannot defend our own doors from the dog, let us be worried, and our nation lose the name of hardiness and policy.", "call in the messengers sent from the dauphin.", "now are we well resolved, and by god's help and yours, the noble sinews of our power, france being ours, we'll bend it to our awe or break it all to pieces. or there we'll sit, ruling in large and ample empery o'er france and all her almost kingly dukedoms, or lay these bones in an unworthy urn, tombless, with no remembrance over them. either our history shall with full mouth speak freely of our acts, or else our grave, like turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth, not worshipped with a waxen epitaph.", "now are we well prepared to know the pleasure of our fair cousin dauphin, for we hear your greeting is from him, not from the king.", "may 't please your majesty to give us leave freely to render what we have in charge, or shall we sparingly show you far off the dauphin's meaning and our embassy?"], ["we are no tyrant, but a christian king, unto whose grace our passion is as subject as is our wretches fettered in our prisons. therefore with frank and with uncurbd plainness tell us the dauphin's mind.", "thus, then, in few: your highness, lately sending into france, did claim some certain dukedoms in the right of your great predecessor, king edward the third; in answer of which claim, the prince our master says that you savor too much of your youth and bids you be advised there's naught in france that can be with a nimble galliard won. you cannot revel into dukedoms there. he therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit, this tun of treasure, and, in lieu of this, desires you let the dukedoms that you claim hear no more of you. this the dauphin speaks.", "what treasure, uncle?", "tennis balls, my liege.", "we are glad the dauphin is so pleasant with us. his present and your pains we thank you for. when we have matched our rackets to these balls, we will in france, by god's grace, play a set shall strike his father's crown into the hazard. tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler that all the courts of france will be disturbed with chases. and we understand him well, how he comes o'er us with our wilder days, not measuring what use we made of them."], ["we never valued this poor seat of england and therefore, living hence, did give ourself to barbarous license, as 'tis ever common that men are merriest when they are from home. but tell the dauphin i will keep my state, be like a king, and show my sail of greatness when i do rouse me in my throne of france, for that i have laid by my majesty and plodded like a man for working days. but i will rise there with so full a glory that i will dazzle all the eyes of france, yea, strike the dauphin blind to look on us. and tell the pleasant prince this mock of his hath turned his balls to gun-stones, and his soul shall stand sore chargd for the wasteful vengeance that shall fly with them; for many a thousand widows shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands, mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down, and some are yet ungotten and unborn that shall have cause to curse the dauphin's scorn. but this lies all within the will of god, to whom i do appeal, and in whose name tell you the dauphin i am coming on, to venge me as i may and to put forth my rightful hand in a well-hallowed cause. so get you hence in peace. and tell the dauphin his jest will savor but of shallow wit when thousands weep more than did laugh at it. convey them with safe conduct. fare you well.", "this was a merry message."], ["we hope to make the sender blush at it. therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour that may give furth'rance to our expedition; for we have now no thought in us but france, save those to god, that run before our business. therefore let our proportions for these wars be soon collected, and all things thought upon that may with reasonable swiftness add more feathers to our wings. for, god before, we'll chide this dauphin at his father's door. therefore let every man now task his thought, that this fair action may on foot be brought."], ["now all the youth of england are on fire, and silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies. now thrive the armorers, and honor's thought reigns solely in the breast of every man. they sell the pasture now to buy the horse, following the mirror of all christian kings with wingd heels, as english mercurys. for now sits expectation in the air and hides a sword, from hilts unto the point, with crowns imperial, crowns and coronets promised to harry and his followers. the french, advised by good intelligence of this most dreadful preparation, shake in their fear, and with pale policy seek to divert the english purposes. o england, model to thy inward greatness, like little body with a mighty heart, what might'st thou do, that honor would thee do, were all thy children kind and natural! but see, thy fault france hath in thee found out, a nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills with treacherous crowns, and three corrupted men one, richard, earl of cambridge, and the second, henry, lord scroop of masham, and the third, sir thomas grey, knight, of northumberland have, for the gilt of france (oh, guilt indeed!), confirmed conspiracy with fearful france, and by their hands this grace of kings must die, if hell and treason hold their promises,"], ["ere he take ship for france, and in southampton. linger your patience on, and we'll digest th' abuse of distance, force a play. the sum is paid, the traitors are agreed, the king is set from london, and the scene is now transported, gentles, to southampton. there is the playhouse now, there must you sit, and thence to france shall we convey you safe and bring you back, charming the narrow seas to give you gentle pass; for, if we may, we'll not offend one stomach with our play. but, till the king come forth, and not till then, unto southampton do we shift our scene."], ["well met, corporal nym.", "good morrow, lieutenant bardolph.", "what, are ancient pistol and you friends yet?", "for my part, i care not. i say little, but when time shall serve, there shall be smiles; but that shall be as it may. i dare not fight, but i will wink and hold out mine iron. it is a simple one, but what though? it will toast cheese, and it will endure cold as another man's sword will, and there's an end.", "i will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we'll be all three sworn brothers to france. let 't be so, good corporal nym.", "faith, i will live so long as i may, that's the certain of it. and when i cannot live any longer, i will do as i may. that is my rest; that is the rendezvous of it.", "it is certain, corporal, that he is married to nell quickly, and certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her.", "i cannot tell. things must be as they may. men may sleep, and they may have their throats about them at that time, and some say knives have edges. it must be as it may. though patience be a tired mare, yet she will plod. there must be conclusions. well, i cannot tell."], ["here comes ancient pistol and his wife. good corporal, be patient here. how now, mine host pistol?", "base tyke, call'st thou me host? now, by this hand, i swear, i scorn the term, nor shall my nell keep lodgers.", "no, by my troth, not long, for we cannot lodge and board a dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of their needles but it will be thought we keep a bawdy house straight.", "oh, well-a-day, lady! if he be not hewn now, we shall see willful adultery and murder committed.", "good lieutenant, good corporal, offer nothing here.", "pish!", "pish for thee, iceland dog, thou prick-eared cur of iceland!", "good corporal nym, show thy valor and put up your sword.", "will you shog off? pistol i would have you ."], ["egregious dog? o viper vile, the in thy most marvelous face, the in thy teeth and in thy throat and in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy, and, which is worse, within thy nasty mouth! i do retort the in thy bowels, for i can take, and pistol's cock is up, and flashing fire will follow.", "i am not barbason; you cannot conjure me. i have an humor to knock you indifferently well. if you grow foul with me, pistol, i will scour you with my rapier, as i may, in fair terms. if you would walk off, i would prick your guts a little in good terms, as i may, and that's the humor of it.", "o braggart vile and damnd furious wight, the grave doth gape, and doting death is near. therefore exhale.", "hear me, hear me what i say: he that strikes the first stroke, i'll run him up to the hilts, as i am a soldier.", "an oath of mickle might, and fury shall abate. give me thy fist, thy forefoot to me give. thy spirits are most tall.", "i will cut thy throat one time or other in fair terms, that is the humor of it.", ", that is the word. i defy thee again. o hound of crete, think'st thou my spouse to get? no, to the spital go, and from the powd'ring tub of infamy fetch forth the lazar kite of cressid's kind, doll tearsheet she by name, and her espouse."], ["i have, and i will hold, the quondam quickly for the only she, and there's enough. go to.", "mine host pistol, you must come to my master and your hostess. he is very sick and would to bed. good bardolph, put thy face between his sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan. faith, he's very ill.", "away, you rogue!", "by my troth, he'll yield the crow a pudding one of these days. the king has killed his heart. good husband, come home presently.", "come, shall i make you two friends? we must to france together. why the devil should we keep knives to cut one another's throats?", "let floods o'erswell and fiends for food howl on!", "you'll pay me the eight shillings i won of you at betting?", "base is the slave that pays.", "that now i will have that's the humor of it.", "as manhood shall compound. push home."], ["by this sword, he that makes the first thrust, i'll kill him. by this sword, i will.", "\"sword\" is an oath, and oaths must have their course.", "corporal nym, an thou wilt be friends, be friends; an thou wilt not, why then be enemies with me too. prithee, put up.", "a noble shalt thou have, and present pay, and liquor likewise will i give to thee, and friendship shall combine, and brotherhood. i'll live by nym, and nym shall live by me. is not this just? for i shall subtler be unto the camp, and profits will accrue. give me thy hand.", "i shall have my noble?", "in cash, most justly paid.", "well, then, that's the humor of 't.", "as ever you come of women, come in quickly to sir john. ah, poor heart, he is so shaked of a burning quotidian tertian that it is most lamentable to behold. sweet men, come to him.", "the king hath run bad humors on the knight, that's the even of it."], ["nym, thou hast spoke the right. his heart is fracted and corroborate.", "the king is a good king, but it must be as it may. he passes some humors and careers.", "let us condole the knight, for, lambkins, we will live."], ["'fore god, his grace is bold to trust these traitors.", "they shall be apprehended by and by.", "how smooth and even they do bear themselves, as if allegiance in their bosoms sat crownd with faith and constant loyalty.", "the king hath note of all that they intend, by interception which they dream not of.", "nay, but the man that was his bedfellow, whom he hath dulled and cloyed with gracious favors that he should, for a foreign purse, so sell his sovereign's life to death and treachery!", "now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard. my lord of cambridge, and my kind lord of masham, and you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts. think you not that the powers we bear with us will cut their passage through the force of france, doing the execution and the act for which we have in head assembled them?", "no doubt, my liege, if each man do his best."], ["i doubt not that, since we are well-persuaded we carry not a heart with us from hence that grows not in a fair consent with ours, nor leave not one behind that doth not wish success and conquest to attend on us.", "never was monarch better feared and loved than is your majesty. there's not, i think, a subject that sits in heart-grief and uneasiness under the sweet shade of your government.", "true. those that were your father's enemies have steeped their galls in honey, and do serve you with hearts create of duty and of zeal.", "we therefore have great cause of thankfulness and shall forget the office of our hand sooner than quittance of desert and merit according to the weight and worthiness.", "so service shall with steeld sinews toil, and labor shall refresh itself with hope to do your grace incessant services.", "we judge no less. uncle of exeter, enlarge the man committed yesterday that railed against our person. we consider it was excess of wine that set him on, and on his more advice we pardon him.", "that's mercy, but too much security. let him be punished, sovereign, lest example breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.", "oh, let us yet be merciful."], ["so may your highness, and yet punish, too.", "sir, you show great mercy if you give him life after the taste of much correction.", "alas, your too much love and care of me are heavy orisons 'gainst this poor wretch. if little faults proceeding on distemper shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch our eye when capital crimes, chewed, swallowed, and digested, appear before us? we'll yet enlarge that man, though cambridge, scroop, and grey, in their dear care and tender preservation of our person, would have him punished. and now to our french causes. who are the late commissioners?", "i one, my lord. your highness bade me ask for it today.", "so did you me, my liege.", "and i, my royal sovereign.", "then, richard, earl of cambridge, there is yours. there yours, lord scroop of masham. and, sir knight, grey of northumberland, this same is yours. read them, and know i know your worthiness. my lord of westmoreland and uncle exeter, we will aboard tonight. why, how now, gentlemen? what see you in those papers, that you lose so much complexion? look you, how they change. their cheeks are paper. why, what read you there that have so cowarded and chased your blood out of appearance?"], ["i do confess my fault, and do submit me to your highness' mercy.", "to which we all appeal.", "the mercy that was quick in us but late by your own counsel is suppressed and killed. you must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy, for your own reasons turn into your bosoms, as dogs upon their masters, worrying you. see you, my princes and my noble peers, these english monsters. my lord of cambridge here, you know how apt our love was to accord to furnish him with all appurtenants belonging to his honor, and this man hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspired, and sworn unto the practices of france, to kill us here in hampton; to the which this knight, no less for bounty bound to us than cambridge is, hath likewise sworn. but oh, what shall i say to thee, lord scroop, thou cruel, ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature? thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels, that knew'st the very bottom of my soul, that almost mightst have coined me into gold, wouldst thou have practiced on me for thy use may it be possible that foreign hire could out of thee extract one spark of evil that might annoy my finger? 'tis so strange that, though the truth of it stands off as gross as black and white, my eye will scarcely see it. treason and murder ever kept together as two yoke-devils sworn to either's purpose, working so grossly in a natural cause that admiration did not whoop at them."], ["but thou, 'gainst all proportion, didst bring in wonder to wait on treason and on murder, and whatsoever cunning fiend it was that wrought upon thee so preposterously hath got the voice in hell for excellence. all other devils that suggest by treasons do botch and bungle up damnation with patches, colors, and with forms being fetched from glist'ring semblances of piety. but he that tempered thee bade thee stand up, gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason, unless to dub thee with the name of traitor. if that same demon that hath gulled thee thus should with his lion gait walk the whole world, he might return to vasty tartar back and tell the legions \"i can never win a soul so easy as that englishman's.\" oh, how hast thou with jealousy infected the sweetness of affiance! show men dutiful? why, so didst thou. seem they grave and learnd? why, so didst thou. come they of noble family? why, so didst thou. seem they religious? why, so didst thou. or are they spare in diet, free from gross passion or of mirth or anger, constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood, garnished and decked in modest complement, not working with the eye without the ear, and but in purgd judgment trusting neither? such and so finely bolted didst thou seem. and thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot to mark the full-fraught man and best endued with some suspicion. i will weep for thee, for this revolt of thine methinks is like another fall of man. their faults are open. arrest them to the answer of the law, and god acquit them of their practices."], ["i arrest thee of high treason, by the name of richard, earl of cambridge. i arrest thee of high treason, by the name of henry, lord scroop of masham. i arrest thee of high treason, by the name of thomas grey, knight, of northumberland.", "our purposes god justly hath discovered, and i repent my fault more than my death, which i beseech your highness to forgive, although my body pay the price of it.", "for me, the gold of france did not seduce, although i did admit it as a motive the sooner to effect what i intended; but god be thankd for prevention, which i in sufferance heartily will rejoice, beseeching god and you to pardon me.", "never did faithful subject more rejoice at the discovery of most dangerous treason than i do at this hour joy o'er myself, prevented from a damnd enterprise. my fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.", "god quit you in his mercy. hear your sentence: you have conspired against our royal person, joined with an enemy proclaimed, and from his coffers received the golden earnest of our death, wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter, his princes and his peers to servitude, his subjects to oppression and contempt, and his whole kingdom into desolation. touching our person, seek we no revenge, but we our kingdom's safety must so tender, whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws we do deliver you. get you therefore hence, poor miserable wretches, to your death, the taste whereof god of his mercy give you patience to endure, and true repentance of all your dear offences. bear them hence."], ["now, lords, for france, the enterprise whereof shall be to you as us, like glorious. we doubt not of a fair and lucky war, since god so graciously hath brought to light this dangerous treason lurking in our way to hinder our beginnings. we doubt not now but every rub is smoothd on our way. then forth, dear countrymen. let us deliver our puissance into the hand of god, putting it straight in expedition. cheerly to sea. the signs of war advance. no king of england if not king of france."], ["prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to staines.", "no; for my manly heart doth earn. bardolph, be blithe. nym, rouse thy vaunting veins. boy, bristle thy courage up. for falstaff, he is dead, and we must earn therefore.", "would i were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in heaven or in hell.", "nay, sure, he's not in hell! he's in arthur's bosom, if ever man went to arthur's bosom. he made a finer end, and went away an it had been any christom child. he parted ev'n just between twelve and one, ev'n at the turning o' th' tide; for after i saw him fumble with the sheets and play with flowers and smile upon his finger's end, i knew there was but one way, for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and he told of green fields. \"how now, sir john?\" quoth i. \"what, man, be o' good cheer!\" so he cried out \"god, god, god!\" three or four times. now i, to comfort him, bid him he should not think of god. i hoped there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. so he bade me lay more clothes on his feet. i put my hand into the bed and felt them, and they were as cold as any stone. then i felt to his knees, and so upward and upward, and all was as cold as any stone.", "they say he cried out of sack.", "ay, that he did."], ["and of women.", "nay, that he did not.", "yes, that he did, and said they were devils incarnate.", "'a could never abide carnation. 'twas a color he never liked.", "he said once the devil would have him about women.", "he did in some sort, indeed, handle women, but then he was rheumatic, and talked of the whore of babylon.", "do you not remember he saw a flea stick upon bardolph's nose, and he said it was a black soul burning in hell?", "well, the fuel is gone that maintained that fire. that's all the riches i got in his service.", "shall we shog? the king will be gone from southampton.", "come, let's away. my love, give me thy lips. look to my chattels and my movables. let senses rule. the word is \"pitch and pay.\" trust none, for oaths are straws, men's faiths are wafer-cakes, and holdfast is the only dog, my duck. therefore, be thy counselor. go, clear thy crystals. yoke-fellows in arms, let us to france, like horse-leeches, my boys, to suck, to suck, the very blood to suck."], ["and that's but unwholesome food, they say.", "touch her soft mouth, and march.", "farewell, hostess.", "i cannot kiss, that is the humor of it. but adieu.", "let housewifery appear. keep close, i thee command.", "farewell. adieu."], ["thus comes the english with full power upon us, and more than carefully it us concerns to answer royally in our defenses. therefore the dukes of berri and of brittany, of brabant and of orlans, shall make forth, and you, prince dauphin, with all swift dispatch, to line and new-repair our towns of war with men of courage and with means defendant. for england his approaches makes as fierce as waters to the sucking of a gulf. it fits us then to be as provident as fear may teach us out of late examples left by the fatal and neglected english upon our fields.", "to view the sick and feeble parts of france. and let us do it with no show of fear, no, with no more than if we heard that england were busied with a whitsun morris-dance. for, my good liege, she is so idly kinged, her scepter so fantastically borne by a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth, that fear attends her not. my most redoubted father, it is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe, for peace itself should not so dull a kingdom, though war nor no known quarrel were in question, but that defenses, musters, preparations, should be maintained, assembled, and collected, as were a war in expectation. therefore i say 'tis meet we all go forth"], ["oh peace, prince dauphin! you are too much mistaken in this king. question your grace the late ambassadors with what great state he heard their embassy, how well supplied with noble counselors, how modest in exception, and withal how terrible in constant resolution, and you shall find his vanities forespent were but the outside of the roman brutus, covering discretion with a coat of folly, as gardeners do with ordure hide those roots that shall first spring and be most delicate.", "well, 'tis not so, my lord high constable. but though we think it so, it is no matter. in cases of defense 'tis best to weigh the enemy more mighty than he seems. so the proportions of defense are filled, which of a weak or niggardly projection doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting a little cloth.", "think we king harry strong, and, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him. the kindred of him hath been fleshed upon us, and he is bred out of that bloody strain that haunted us in our familiar paths. witness our too-much-memorable shame when cressy battle fatally was struck and all our princes captived by the hand of that black name, edward, black prince of wales, whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing"], ["up in the air, crowned with the golden sun, saw his heroical seed and smiled to see him mangle the work of nature and deface the patterns that by god and by french fathers had twenty years been made. this is a stem of that victorious stock, and let us fear the native mightiness and fate of him.", "ambassadors from harry king of england do crave admittance to your majesty.", "we'll give them present audience. go, and bring them.", "you see this chase is hotly followed, friends.", "turn head and stop pursuit, for coward dogs most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten runs far before them. good my sovereign, take up the english short, and let them know of what a monarchy you are the head. self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin as self-neglecting.", "from our brother england?", "from him, and thus he greets your majesty: he wills you, in the name of god almighty, that you divest yourself and lay apart"], ["the borrowed glories that, by gift of heaven, by law of nature and of nations, 'longs to him and to his heirs namely, the crown and all wide-stretchd honors that pertain by custom and the ordinance of times unto the crown of france. that you may know 'tis no sinister nor no awkward claim picked from the wormholes of long-vanished days, nor from the dust of old oblivion raked, he sends you this most memorable line, in every branch truly demonstrative, willing you overlook this pedigree, and when you find him evenly derived from his most famed of famous ancestors, edward the third, he bids you then resign your crown and kingdom, indirectly held from him, the native and true challenger.", "or else what follows?", "bloody constraint, for if you hide the crown even in your hearts, there will he rake for it. therefore in fierce tempest is he coming, in thunder and in earthquake like a jove, that, if requiring fail, he will compel, and bids you, in the bowels of the lord, deliver up the crown and to take mercy on the poor souls for whom this hungry war opens his vasty jaws, and on your head turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries, the dead men's blood, the pining maidens' groans, for husbands, fathers, and betrothd lovers, that shall be swallowed in this controversy. this is his claim, his threat'ning, and my message unless the dauphin be in presence here, to whom expressly i bring greeting too."], ["for us, we will consider of this further. tomorrow shall you bear our full intent back to our brother england.", "for the dauphin, i stand here for him. what to him from england?", "scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt, and anything that may not misbecome the mighty sender, doth he prize you at. thus says my king: an if your father's highness do not, in grant of all demands at large, sweeten the bitter mock you sent his majesty, he'll call you to so hot an answer of it that caves and womby vaultages of france shall chide your trespass and return your mock in second accent of his ordinance.", "say, if my father render fair return, it is against my will, for i desire nothing but odds with england. to that end, as matching to his youth and vanity, i did present him with the paris balls.", "he'll make your paris louvre shake for it, were it the mistress court of mighty europe. and be assured you'll find a difference, as we his subjects have in wonder found, between the promise of his greener days and these he masters now. now he weighs time even to the utmost grain. that you shall read in your own losses, if he stay in france.", "tomorrow shall you know our mind at full."], ["dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king come here himself to question our delay, for he is footed in this land already.", "you shall be soon dispatched with fair conditions. a night is but small breath and little pause to answer matters of this consequence."], ["thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies in motion of no less celerity than that of thought. suppose that you have seen the well-appointed king at hampton pier embark his royalty, and his brave fleet with silken streamers the young phoebus fanning. play with your fancies and in them behold, upon the hempen tackle, shipboys climbing. hear the shrill whistle, which doth order give to sounds confused. behold the threaden sails, borne with th' invisible and creeping wind, draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea, breasting the lofty surge. oh, do but think you stand upon the rivage and behold a city on th' inconstant billows dancing, for so appears this fleet majestical holding due course to harfleur. follow, follow! grapple your minds to sternage of this navy and leave your england, as dead midnight still, guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women, either past or not arrived to pith and puissance, for who is he whose chin is but enriched with one appearing hair that will not follow these culled and choice-drawn cavaliers to france? work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege. behold the ordnance on their carriages, with fatal mouths gaping on girded harfleur. suppose th' ambassador from the french comes back, tells harry that the king doth offer him"], ["katherine his daughter and with her, to dowry, some petty and unprofitable dukedoms. the offer likes not, and the nimble gunner with linstock now the devilish cannon touches,", "and down goes all before them. still be kind and eke out our performance with your mind."], ["once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more, or close the wall up with our english dead! in peace there's nothing so becomes a man as modest stillness and humility, but when the blast of war blows in our ears, then imitate the action of the tiger: stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood, disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage, then lend the eye a terrible aspect, let pry through the portage of the head like the brass cannon, let the brow o'erwhelm it as fearfully as doth a galld rock o'erhang and jutty his confounded base, swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean. now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide, hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit to his full height. on, on, you noblest english, whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof, fathers that, like so many alexanders, have in these parts from morn till even fought and sheathed their swords for lack of argument. dishonor not your mothers. now attest that those whom you called fathers did beget you. be copy now to men of grosser blood, and teach them how to war. and you, good yeoman, whose limbs were made in england, show us here the mettle of your pasture. let us swear that you are worth your breeding, which i doubt not,"], ["for there is none of you so mean and base that hath not noble luster in your eyes. i see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, straining upon the start. the game's afoot. follow your spirit, and upon this charge cry \"god for harry, england, and saint george!\""], ["on, on, on, on, on! to the breach, to the breach!", "pray thee, corporal, stay. the knocks are too hot, and, for mine own part, i have not a case of lives. the humor of it is too hot; that is the very plainsong of it.", "\"the plainsong\" is most just, for humors do abound.", "would i were in an alehouse in london! i would give all my fame for a pot of ale, and safety.", "and i.", "", "up to the breach, you dogs! avaunt, you cullions!"], ["be merciful, great duke, to men of mold. abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage, abate thy rage, great duke. good bawcock, 'bate thy rage. use lenity, sweet chuck.", "these be good humors. your honor wins bad humors.", "as young as i am, i have observed these three swashers. i am boy to them all three, but all they three, though they would serve me, could not be man to me. for indeed three such antics do not amount to a man: for bardolph, he is white-livered and red-faced, by the means whereof he faces it out but fights not; for pistol, he hath a killing tongue and a quiet sword, by the means whereof he breaks words and keeps whole weapons; for nym, he hath heard that men of few words are the best men, and therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest he should be thought a coward, but his few bad words are matched with as few good deeds, for he never broke any man's head but his own, and that was against a post when he was drunk. they will steal anything and call it purchase. bardolph stole a lute case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold it for three halfpence. nym and bardolph are sworn brothers in filching, and in calais they stole a fire shovel. i knew by that piece of service the men would carry coals. they would have me as familiar with men's pockets as their gloves or their handkerchers, which makes much against my manhood, if i should take from another's pocket to put into mine, for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs. i must leave them and seek some better service. their villainy goes against my weak stomach, and therefore i must cast it up."], ["captain fluellen, you must come presently to the mines; the duke of gloucester would speak with you.", "to the mines? tell you the duke it is not so good to come to the mines, for, look you, the mines is not according to the disciplines of the war. the concavities of it is not sufficient, for, look you, th' athversary, you may discuss unto the duke, look you, is digt himself four yard under the countermines. by cheshu, i think he will plow up all if there is not better directions.", "the duke of gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is given, is altogether directed by an irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i' faith.", "it is captain macmorris, is it not?", "i think it be.", "by cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world. i will verify as much in his beard. he has no more directions in the true disciplines of the wars, look you, of the roman disciplines, than is a puppy dog.", "here he comes, and the scots captain, captain jamy, with him."], ["captain jamy is a marvelous falorous gentleman, that is certain, and of great expedition and knowledge in th' aunchient wars, upon my particular knowledge of his directions. by cheshu, he will maintain his argument as well as any military man in the world in the disciplines of the pristine wars of the romans.", "i say gudday, captain fluellen.", "godden to your worship, good captain james.", "how now, captain macmorris, have you quit the mines? have the pioneers given o'er?", "by chrish, la, 'tish ill done. the work ish give over. the trompet sound the retreat. by my hand i swear, and my father's soul, the work ish ill done. it ish give over. i would have blowed up the town, so chrish save me, la, in an hour. oh, 'tish ill done, 'tish ill done, by my hand, 'tish ill done.", "captain macmorris, i beseech you now, will you voutsafe me, look you, a few disputations with you as partly touching or concerning the disciplines of the war, the roman wars? in the way of argument, look you, and friendly communication, partly to satisfy my opinion, and partly for the satisfaction, look you, of my mind, as touching the direction of the military discipline, that is the point.", "it sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captens bath, and i sall quit you with gud leve, as i may pick occasion, that sall i, marry."], ["it is no time to discourse, so chrish save me. the day is hot, and the weather, and the wars, and the king, and the dukes. it is no time to discourse. the town is beseeched, and the trumpet call us to the breach, and we talk and, be chrish, do nothing, 'tis shame for us all. so god sa' me, 'tis shame to stand still. it is shame, by my hand. and there is throats to be cut and works to be done, and there ish nothing done, so chrish sa' me, la.", "by the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to slomber, ay'll de gud service, or i'll lig i' th' grund for it, ay, or go to death. and i'll pay 't as valorously as i may, that sall i suerly do, that is the breff and the long. marry, i wad full fain heard some question 'tween you tway.", "captain macmorris, i think, look you, under your correction, there is not many of your nation", "of my nation? what ish my nation? ish a villain and a basterd and a knave and a rascal. what ish my nation? who talks of my nation?", "look you, if you take the matter otherwise than is meant, captain macmorris, peradventure i shall think you do not use me with that affability as, in discretion, you ought to use me, look you, being as good a man as yourself, both in the disciplines of war and in the derivation of my birth and in other particularities.", "i do not know you so good a man as myself. so chrish save me, i will cut off your head.", "gentlemen both, you will mistake each other."], ["ah, that's a foul fault.", "the town sounds a parley.", "captain macmorris, when there is more better opportunity to be required, look you, i will be so bold as to tell you i know the disciplines of war, and there is an end."], ["how yet resolves the governor of the town? this is the latest parle we will admit. therefore to our best mercy give yourselves or, like to men proud of destruction, defy us to our worst. for, as i am a soldier, a name that in my thoughts becomes me best, if i begin the batt'ry once again, i will not leave the half-achieved harfleur till in her ashes she lie burid. the gates of mercy shall be all shut up, and the fleshed soldier, rough and hard of heart, in liberty of bloody hand, shall range with conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants. what is it then to me if impious war, arrayed in flames like to the prince of fiends, do with his smirched complexion all fell feats enlinked to waste and desolation? what is 't to me, when you yourselves are cause, if your pure maidens fall into the hand of hot and forcing violation? what rein can hold licentious wickedness when down the hill he holds his fierce career? we may as bootless spend our vain command upon th' enragd soldiers in their spoil as send precepts to the leviathan to come ashore. therefore, you men of harfleur, take pity of your town and of your people whiles yet my soldiers are in my command, whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace"], ["o'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds of heady murder, spoil, and villainy. if not, why, in a moment look to see the blind and bloody soldier with foul hand desire the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters, your fathers taken by the silver beards and their most reverend heads dashed to the walls, your naked infants spitted upon pikes whiles the mad mothers with their howls confused do break the clouds, as did the wives of jewry at herod's bloody-hunting slaughtermen. what say you? will you yield and this avoid or, guilty in defense, be thus destroyed?", "our expectation hath this day an end. the dauphin, whom of succors we entreated, returns us that his powers are yet not ready to raise so great a siege. therefore, great king, we yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy. enter our gates, dispose of us and ours, for we no longer are defensible.", "open your gates.", "come, uncle exeter, go you and enter harfleur. there remain and fortify it strongly 'gainst the french. use mercy to them all for us, dear uncle, the winter coming on and sickness growing upon our soldiers, we will retire to calais. tonight in harfleur will we be your guest; tomorrow for the march are we addressed."], ["", ".", ". la main", "la main?", "les doigts?", "les doigts? les doigts? \"de fingres\"; \"de fingres.\"", ", \"de hand\"; , \"de fingres.\" les ongles?", "les ongles?", "\"de nails.\" : \"de hand, de fingres, et de nails.\"", "", "le bras.", ""], ["le coude?", "", "\"d'elbow.\"", "", "\"de hand, de fingres, de nails, de arma, de bilbow.\"", "\"d'elbow,\"", "\"d'elbow.\" comment le col?", "\"de nick,\"", "\"de nick.\"", "\"de chin.\"", "\"de sin.\" \"de nick\"; \"de sin.\"", "", "", ""], ["\"de hand, de fingre, de nails \"", "\"de nails,\"", "\"de nails, de arme, de ilbow.\"", "\"d'elbow.\"", "\"d'elbow, de nick, et de sin.\"", "\"le foot,\" \"le count.\"", "\"le foot\" \"de count.\" \"le foot\" \"le count\"! \"d' hand, de fingre, de nails, d' arme, d'elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot, le count.\"", "excellent, madame!", ""], ["'tis certain he hath passed the river somme.", "an if he be not fought withal, my lord, let us not live in france. let us quit all and give our vineyards to a barbarous people.", ", shall a few sprays of us, the emptying of our fathers' luxury, our scions, put in wild and savage stock, spurt up so suddenly into the clouds and overlook their grafters?", "normans, but bastard normans, norman bastards! if they march along unfought withal, but i will sell my dukedom to buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm in that nook-shotten isle of albion.", "where have they this mettle? is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull, on whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale, killing their fruit with frowns? can sodden water, a drench for sur-reined jades, their barley broth,"], ["decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat? and shall our quick blood, spirited with wine, seem frosty? oh, for honor of our land, let us not hang like roping icicles upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty people sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields! \"poor\" we may call them in their native lords.", "by faith and honor, our madams mock at us and plainly say our mettle is bred out and they will give their bodies to the lust of english youth to new-store france with bastard warriors.", "and teach lavoltas high, and swift corantos, saying our grace is only in our heels and that we are most lofty runaways. they bid us to the english dancing schools.", "where is montjoy the herald? speed him hence. let him greet england with our sharp defiance. up, princes, and, with spirit of honor edged more sharper than your swords, hie to the field: charles delabreth, high constable of france; you dukes of orlans, bourbon, and of berri, alenon, brabant, bar, and burgundy; jacques chatillon, rambures, vaudemont, beaumont, grandpr, roussi, and faulconbridge, foix, lestrale, bouciqualt, and charolois; high dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and knights, for your great seats now quit you of great shames. bar harry england, that sweeps through our land with pennons painted in the blood of harfleur. rush on his host, as doth the melted snow upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat the alps doth spit and void his rheum upon. go down upon him you have power enough and in a captive chariot into rouen bring him our prisoner."], ["this becomes the great! sorry am i his numbers are so few, his soldiers sick and famished in their march, for, i am sure, when he shall see our army he'll drop his heart into the sink of fear and for achievement offer us his ransom.", "therefore, lord constable, haste on montjoy and let him say to england that we send to know what willing ransom he will give. prince dauphin, you shall stay with us in rouen.", "not so, i do beseech your majesty.", "be patient, for you shall remain with us. now forth, lord constable and princes all, and quickly bring us word of england's fall."], ["how now, captain fluellen? come you from the bridge?", "i assure you, there is very excellent services committed at the bridge.", "is the duke of exeter safe?", "the duke of exeter is as magnanimous as agamemnon, and a man that i love and honor with my soul and my heart and my duty and my life and my living and my uttermost power. he is not, god be praised and blessed, any hurt in the world, but keeps the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. there is an aunchient lieutenant there at the pridge. i think in my very conscience he is as valiant a man as mark antony, and he is a man of no estimation in the world, but i did see him do as gallant service.", "what do you call him?", "he is called aunchient pistol.", "i know him not.", "here is the man."], ["captain, i thee beseech to do me favors. the duke of exeter doth love thee well.", "ay, i praise god, and i have merited some love at his hands.", "bardolph, a soldier firm and sound of heart and of buxom valor, hath, by cruel fate and giddy fortune's furious fickle wheel, that goddess blind that stands upon the rolling restless stone", "by your patience, aunchient pistol, fortune is painted blind, with a muffler afore her eyes, to signify to you that fortune is blind; and she is painted also with a wheel to signify to you, which is the moral of it, that she is turning and inconstant, and mutability and variation; and her foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone, which rolls and rolls and rolls. in good truth, the poet makes a most excellent description of it. fortune is an excellent moral.", "fortune is bardolph's foe and frowns on him, for he hath stolen a pax and hangd must he be. a damnd death! let gallows gape for dog, let man go free, and let not hemp his windpipe suffocate. but exeter hath given the doom of death for pax of little price. therefore go speak the duke will hear thy voice and let not bardolph's vital thread be cut with edge of penny cord and vile reproach. speak, captain, for his life, and i will thee requite.", "aunchient pistol, i do partly understand your meaning.", "why then, rejoice therefore."], ["certainly, aunchient, it is not a thing to rejoice at, for if, look you, he were my brother, i would desire the duke to use his good pleasure and put him to execution, for discipline ought to be used.", "die and be damned, and for thy friendship!", "it is well.", "the fig of spain!", "very good.", "why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal. i remember him now, a bawd, a cutpurse.", "i'll assure you, he uttered as prave words at the pridge as you shall see in a summer's day. but it is very well; what he has spoke to me, that is well, i warrant you, when time is serve.", "why, 'tis a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and then goes to the wars to grace himself at his return into london under the form of a soldier. and such fellows are perfect in the great commanders' names, and they will learn you by rote where services were done at such and such a sconce, at such a breach, at such a convoy; who came off bravely, who was shot, who disgraced, what terms the enemy stood on. and this they con perfectly in the phrase of war, which they"], ["trick up with new-tuned oaths; and what a beard of the general's cut and a horrid suit of the camp will do among foaming bottles and ale-washed wits is wonderful to be thought on. but you must learn to know such slanders of the age, or else you may be marvelously mistook.", "i tell you what, captain gower. i do perceive he is not the man that he would gladly make show to the world he is. if i find a hole in his coat, i will tell him my mind.", "hark you, the king is coming, and i must speak with him from the pridge. god pless your majesty.", "how now, fluellen, cam'st thou from the bridge?", "ay, so please your majesty. the duke of exeter has very gallantly maintained the pridge. the french is gone off, look you, and there is gallant and most prave passages. marry, th' athversary was have possession of the pridge, but he is enforced to retire, and the duke of exeter is master of the pridge. i can tell your majesty, the duke is a prave man.", "what men have you lost, fluellen?", "the perdition of th' athversary hath been very great, reasonable great. marry, for my part, i think the duke hath lost never a man, but one that is like to be executed for robbing a church, one bardolph, if your majesty know the man. his face is all bubukles and whelks and knobs and flames o' fire; and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a coal of fire, sometimes plue and sometimes red, but his nose is executed, and his fire's out."], ["we would have all such offenders so cut off, and we give express charge that in our marches through the country there be nothing compelled from the villages, nothing taken but paid for, none of the french upbraided or abused in disdainful language; for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom, the gentler gamester is the soonest winner.", "you know me by my habit.", "well then, i know thee. what shall i know of thee?", "my master's mind.", "unfold it.", "thus says my king: \"say thou to harry of england, though we seemed dead, we did but sleep. advantage is a better soldier than rashness. tell him we could have rebuked him at harfleur, but that we thought not good to bruise an injury till it were full ripe. now we speak upon our cue, and our voice is imperial. england shall repent his folly, see his"], ["weakness, and admire our sufferance. bid him therefore consider of his ransom, which must proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we have lost, the disgrace we have digested, which, in weight to reanswer, his pettiness would bow under. for our losses, his exchequer is too poor; for th' effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom too faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own person, kneeling at our feet but a weak and worthless satisfaction. to this, add defiance, and tell him, for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose condemnation is pronounced.\" so far my king and master; so much my office.", "what is thy name? i know thy quality.", "montjoy.", "thou dost thy office fairly. turn thee back, and tell thy king i do not seek him now but could be willing to march on to calais without impeachment, for, to say the sooth, though 'tis no wisdom to confess so much unto an enemy of craft and vantage, my people are with sickness much enfeebled, my numbers lessened, and those few i have almost no better than so many french, who when they were in health, i tell thee, herald, i thought upon one pair of english legs did march three frenchmen. yet, forgive me, god, that i do brag thus. this your air of france hath blown that vice in me. i must repent. go therefore, tell thy master: here i am. my ransom is this frail and worthless trunk, my army but a weak and sickly guard, yet, god before, tell him we will come on though france himself and such another neighbor stand in our way. there's for thy labor, montjoy. go bid thy master well advise himself: if we may pass, we will; if we be hindered, we shall your tawny ground with your red blood discolor. and so, montjoy, fare you well. the sum of all our answer is but this: we would not seek a battle as we are, nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it. so tell your master."], ["i shall deliver so. thanks to your highness.", "i hope they will not come upon us now.", "we are in god's hand, brother, not in theirs. march to the bridge. it now draws toward night. beyond the river we'll encamp ourselves, and on tomorrow bid them march away."], ["tut, i have the best armor of the world. would it were day!", "you have an excellent armor, but let my horse have his due.", "it is the best horse of europe.", "will it never be morning?", "my lord of orlans, and my lord high constable, you talk of horse and armor?", "you are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.", "what a long night is this! i will not change my horse with any that treads but on four pasterns. ha! he bounds from the earth, as if his entrails were hairs, le cheval volant, the pegasus, qui a les narines de feu. when i bestride him, i soar; i am a hawk; he trots the air. the earth sings when he touches it. the basest horn of his hoof is more musical than the pipe of hermes.", "he's of the color of the nutmeg.", "and of the heat of the ginger. it is a beast for perseus. he is pure air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and water never appear in him, but only in patient stillness while his rider mounts him. he is indeed a horse, and all other jades you may call beasts."], ["indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.", "it is the prince of palfreys. his neigh is like the bidding of a monarch, and his countenance enforces homage.", "no more, cousin.", "nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey. it is a theme as fluent as the sea. turn the sands into eloquent tongues, and my horse is argument for them all. 'tis a subject for a sovereign to reason on, and for a sovereign's sovereign to ride on, and for the world, familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart their particular functions and wonder at him. i once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus: \"wonder of nature \"", "i have heard a sonnet begin so to one's mistress.", "then did they imitate that which i composed to my courser, for my horse is my mistress.", "your mistress bears well.", "me well which is the prescript praise and perfection of a good and particular mistress.", "nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly shook your back.", "so perhaps did yours."], ["mine was not bridled.", "oh, then belike she was old and gentle, and you rode, like a kern of ireland, your french hose off and in your straight strossers.", "you have good judgment in horsemanship.", "be warned by me, then: they that ride so, and ride not warily, fall into foul bogs. i had rather have my horse to my mistress.", "i had as lief have my mistress a jade.", "i tell thee, constable, my mistress wears his own hair.", "i could make as true a boast as that if i had a sow to my mistress.", "\"le chien est retourn son propre vomissement, et la truie lave au bourbier.\" thou mak'st use of anything.", "yet do i not use my horse for my mistress, or any such proverb so little kin to the purpose.", "my lord constable, the armor that i saw in your tent tonight, are those stars or suns upon it?", "stars, my lord.", "some of them will fall tomorrow, i hope."], ["and yet my sky shall not want.", "that may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and 'twere more honor some were away.", "ev'n as your horse bears your praises who would trot as well were some of your brags dismounted.", "would i were able to load him with his desert! will it never be day? i will trot tomorrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with english faces.", "i will not say so, for fear i should be faced out of my way. but i would it were morning, for i would fain be about the ears of the english.", "who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?", "you must first go yourself to hazard ere you have them."], ["'tis midnight. i'll go arm myself.", "the dauphin longs for morning.", "he longs to eat the english.", "i think he will eat all he kills.", "by the white hand of my lady, he's a gallant prince.", "swear by her foot, that she may tread out the oath.", "he is simply the most active gentleman of france.", "doing is activity, and he will still be doing.", "he never did harm that i heard of.", "nor will do none tomorrow. he will keep that good name still.", "i know him to be valiant.", "i was told that by one that knows him better than you.", "what's he?", "marry, he told me so himself; and he said he cared not who knew it.", "he needs not. it is no hidden virtue in him."], ["by my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody saw it but his lackey. 'tis a hooded valor, and when it appears, it will bate.", "ill will never said well.", "i will cap that proverb with \"there is flattery in friendship.\"", "and i will take up that with \"give the devil his due.\"", "well placed; there stands your friend for the devil. have at the very eye of that proverb with \"a pox of the devil.\"", "you are the better at proverbs, by how much \"a fool's bolt is soon shot.\"", "you have shot over.", "'tis not the first time you were overshot.", "my lord high constable, the english lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents.", "who hath measured the ground?", "the lord grandpr.", "a valiant and most expert gentleman. would it were day! alas, poor harry of england! he longs not for the dawning as we do."], ["what a wretched and peevish fellow is this king of england to mope with his fat-brained followers so far out of his knowledge.", "if the english had any apprehension, they would run away.", "that they lack, for if their heads had any intellectual armor, they could never wear such heavy head-pieces.", "that island of england breeds very valiant creatures. their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage.", "foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a russian bear and have their heads crushed like rotten apples. you may as well say, that's a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion.", "just, just; and the men do sympathize with the mastiffs in robustious and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their wives. and then give them great meals of beef and iron and steel, they will eat like wolves and fight like devils.", "ay, but these english are shrewdly out of beef.", "then shall we find tomorrow they have only stomachs to eat and none to fight. now is it time to arm. come, shall we about it?", "it is now two o'clock. but, let me see, by ten we shall have each a hundred englishmen."], ["now entertain conjecture of a time when creeping murmur and the poring dark fills the wide vessel of the universe. from camp to camp, through the foul womb of night, the hum of either army stilly sounds, that the fixed sentinels almost receive the secret whispers of each other's watch. fire answers fire, and through their paly flames each battle sees the other's umbered face. steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs piercing the night's dull ear; and from the tents the armorers, accomplishing the knights, with busy hammers closing rivets up, give dreadful note of preparation. the country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll, and, the third hour of drowsy morning named, proud of their numbers and secure in soul, the confident and overlusty french do the low-rated english play at dice and chide the cripple, tardy-gaited night, who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp so tediously away. the poor condemnd english, like sacrifices, by their watchful fires sit patiently and inly ruminate the morning's danger; and their gesture sad, investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats, presenteth them unto the gazing moon so many horrid ghosts. oh, now, who will behold the royal captain of this ruined band"], ["walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent? let him cry, \"praise and glory on his head!\" for forth he goes and visits all his host, bids them good morrow with a modest smile, and calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen. upon his royal face there is no note how dread an army hath enrounded him, nor doth he dedicate one jot of color unto the weary and all-watchd night, but freshly looks and overbears attaint with cheerful semblance and sweet majesty, that every wretch, pining and pale before, beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks. a largess universal, like the sun, his liberal eye doth give to everyone, thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all behold, as may unworthiness define, a little touch of harry in the night. and so our scene must to the battle fly, where, oh, for pity, we shall much disgrace, with four or five most vile and ragged foils right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous, the name of agincourt. yet sit and see, minding true things by what their mock'ries be."], ["gloucester, 'tis true that we are in great danger. the greater therefore should our courage be. good morrow, brother bedford. god almighty, there is some soul of goodness in things evil, would men observingly distill it out. for our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers, which is both healthful and good husbandry. besides, they are our outward consciences and preachers to us all, admonishing that we should dress us fairly for our end. thus may we gather honey from the weed and make a moral of the devil himself.", "good morrow, old sir thomas erpingham. a good soft pillow for that good white head were better than a churlish turf of france.", "not so, my liege, this lodging likes me better, since i may say, \"now lie i like a king.\"", "'tis good for men to love their present pains upon example. so the spirit is eased. and when the mind is quickened, out of doubt, the organs, though defunct and dead before, break up their drowsy grave and newly move, with casted slough and fresh legerity. lend me thy cloak, sir thomas. brothers both, commend me to the princes in our camp, do my good morrow to them, and anon desire them all to my pavilion."], ["we shall, my liege.", "shall i attend your grace?", "no, my good knight. go with my brothers to my lords of england. i and my bosom must debate awhile, and then i would no other company.", "the lord in heaven bless thee, noble harry!", "god-a-mercy, old heart, thou speak'st cheerfully.", "qui vous l?", "a friend.", "discuss unto me: art thou officer or art thou base, common, and popular?", "i am a gentleman of a company.", "trail'st thou the puissant pike?", "even so. what are you?", "as good a gentleman as the emperor."], ["then you are a better than the king.", "the king's a bawcock, and a heart of gold, a lad of life, an imp of fame, of parents good, of fist most valiant. i kiss his dirty shoe, and from heartstring i love the lovely bully. what is thy name?", "harry le roy.", "le roy? a cornish name. art thou of cornish crew?", "no, i am a welshman.", "know'st thou fluellen?", "yes.", "tell him i'll knock his leek about his pate upon saint davy's day.", "do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest he knock that about yours.", "art thou his friend?", "and his kinsman too.", "the for thee then!", "i thank you. god be with you.", "my name is pistol called."], ["it sorts well with your fierceness.", "captain fluellen.", "so. in the name of jesu christ, speak fewer. it is the greatest admiration in the universal world when the true and aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept. if you would take the pains but to examine the wars of pompey the great, you shall find, i warrant you, that there is no tiddle toddle nor pibble babble in pompey's camp. i warrant you, you shall find the ceremonies of the wars and the cares of it and the forms of it and the sobriety of it and the modesty of it to be otherwise.", "why, the enemy is loud. you hear him all night.", "if the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, is it meet, think you, that we should also, look you, be an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, in your own conscience, now?", "i will speak lower.", "i pray you and beseech you that you will.", "though it appear a little out of fashion, there is much care and valor in this welshman."], ["brother john bates, is not that the morning which breaks yonder?", "i think it be, but we have no great cause to desire the approach of day.", "we see yonder the beginning of the day, but i think we shall never see the end of it. who goes there?", "a friend.", "under what captain serve you?", "under sir thomas erpingham.", "a good old commander and a most kind gentleman. i pray you, what thinks he of our estate?", "even as men wracked upon a sand, that look to be washed off the next tide.", "he hath not told his thought to the king?", "no. nor it is not meet he should, for, though i speak it to you, i think the king is but a man as i am. the violet smells to him as it doth to me. the element shows to him as it doth to me. all his senses have but human conditions. his ceremonies laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man, and though his affections are higher mounted than ours, yet when they stoop, they stoop with the like wing. therefore, when he sees reason of fears as we do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish as ours are. yet, in reason, no man should possess him with any appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his army."], ["he may show what outward courage he will, but i believe, as cold a night as 'tis, he could wish himself in thames up to the neck; and so i would he were, and i by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.", "by my troth, i will speak my conscience of the king. i think he would not wish himself anywhere but where he is.", "then i would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed, and a many poor men's lives saved.", "i dare say you love him not so ill to wish him here alone, howsoever you speak this to feel other men's minds. methinks i could not die anywhere so contented as in the king's company, his cause being just and his quarrel honorable.", "that's more than we know.", "ay, or more than we should seek after, for we know enough if we know we are the king's subjects. if his cause be wrong, our obedience to the king wipes the crime of it out of us.", "but if the cause be not good, the king himself hath a heavy reckoning to make, when all those legs and arms and heads, chopped off in a battle, shall join together at the latter day, and cry all, \"we died at such a place,\" some swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe, some upon their children rawly left. i am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle, for how can they charitably dispose of anything, when blood is their argument? now, if these men do not die well, it will be a black matter for the king that led them to it, who to disobey were against all proportion of subjection."], ["so, if a son that is by his father sent about merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule, should be imposed upon his father that sent him. or if a servant, under his master's command transporting a sum of money, be assailed by robbers and die in many irreconciled iniquities, you may call the business of the master the author of the servant's damnation. but this is not so. the king is not bound to answer the particular endings of his soldiers, the father of his son, nor the master of his servant, for they purpose not their death, when they purpose their services. besides, there is no king, be his cause never so spotless, if it come to the arbitrament of swords, can try it out with all unspotted soldiers. some, peradventure, have on them the guilt of premeditated and contrived murder; some, of beguiling virgins with the broken seals of perjury; some, making the wars their bulwark, that have before gored the gentle bosom of peace with pillage and robbery. now, if these men have defeated the law and outrun native punishment, though they can outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from god. war is his beadle, war is his vengeance, so that here men are punished for before-breach of the king's laws in now the king's quarrel. where they feared the death, they have borne life away; and where they would be safe, they perish. then, if they die unprovided, no more is the king guilty of their damnation than he was before guilty of those impieties for the which they are now visited. every subject's duty is the king's, but every subject's soul is his own. therefore should every soldier in the wars do as every sick man in his bed: wash every mote out of his conscience. and, dying so, death is to him advantage; or not dying, the time was blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained. and in him that escapes, it were not sin to think that, making god so free an offer, he let him outlive that day to see his greatness and to teach others how they should prepare."], ["'tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his own head. the king is not to answer it.", "i do not desire he should answer for me, and yet i determine to fight lustily for him.", "i myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.", "ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully, but when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed, and we ne'er the wiser.", "if i live to see it, i will never trust his word after.", "you pay him then. that's a perilous shot out of an elder gun, that a poor and private displeasure can do against a monarch. you may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a peacock's feather. you'll \"never trust his word after.\" come, 'tis a foolish saying.", "your reproof is something too round. i should be angry with you if the time were convenient.", "let it be a quarrel between us, if you live."], ["i embrace it.", "how shall i know thee again?", "give me any gage of thine, and i will wear it in my bonnet. then, if ever thou dar'st acknowledge it, i will make it my quarrel.", "here's my glove. give me another of thine.", "there.", "this will i also wear in my cap. if ever thou come to me and say, after tomorrow, \"this is my glove,\" by this hand i will take thee a box on the ear.", "if ever i live to see it, i will challenge it.", "thou dar'st as well be hanged.", "well, i will do it, though i take thee in the king's company.", "keep thy word. fare thee well.", "be friends, you english fools, be friends. we have french quarrels enough, if you could tell how to reckon.", "indeed, the french may lay twenty french crowns to one they will beat us, for they bear them on their shoulders. but it is no english treason to cut french crowns, and tomorrow the king himself will be a clipper."], ["upon the king! let us our lives, our souls, our debts, our careful wives, our children, and our sins lay on the king! we must bear all. o hard condition, twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath of every fool, whose sense no more can feel but his own wringing. what infinite heart's ease must kings neglect that private men enjoy? and what have kings that privates have not too, save ceremony, save general ceremony? and what art thou, thou idol ceremony? what kind of god art thou, that suffer'st more of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers? what are thy rents? what are thy comings in? o ceremony, show me but thy worth! what is thy soul of adoration? art thou aught else but place, degree, and form, creating awe and fear in other men, wherein thou art less happy, being feared, than they in fearing? what drink'st thou oft, instead of homage sweet, but poisoned flattery? oh, be sick, great greatness, and bid thy ceremony give thee cure! think'st thou the fiery fever will go out with titles blown from adulation? will it give place to flexure and low bending? canst thou, when thou command'st the beggar's knee, command the health of it? no, thou proud dream, that play'st so subtly with a king's repose. i am a king that find thee, and i know 'tis not the balm, the scepter, and the ball, the sword, the mace, the crown imperial, the intertissued robe of gold and pearl, the farcd title running 'fore the king, the throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp"], ["that beats upon the high shore of this world. no, not all these, thrice-gorgeous ceremony, not all these, laid in bed majestical, can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave, who, with a body filled and vacant mind, gets him to rest, crammed with distressful bread; never sees horrid night, the child of hell, but, like a lackey, from the rise to set sweats in the eye of phoebus, and all night sleeps in elysium; next day after dawn, doth rise and help hyperion to his horse, and follows so the ever-running year with profitable labor to his grave. and, but for ceremony, such a wretch, winding up days with toil and nights with sleep, had the forehand and vantage of a king. the slave, a member of the country's peace, enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots what watch the king keeps to maintain the peace, whose hours the peasant best advantages.", "my lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence, seek through your camp to find you.", "good old knight, collect them all together at my tent. i'll be before thee.", "i shall do't, my lord."], ["o god of battles, steel my soldiers' hearts. possess them not with fear. take from them now the sense of reck'ning ere th' opposd numbers pluck their hearts from them. not today, o lord, oh, not today, think not upon the fault my father made in compassing the crown. i richard's body have interrd anew, and on it have bestowed more contrite tears than from it issued forcd drops of blood. five hundred poor i have in yearly pay, who twice a day their withered hands hold up toward heaven to pardon blood. and i have built two chantries where the sad and solemn priests sing still for richard's soul. more will i do though all that i can do is nothing worth, since that my penitence comes after all, imploring pardon.", "my liege.", "my brother gloucester's voice. ay, i know thy errand. i will go with thee. the day, my friends, and all things stay for me."], ["the sun doth gild our armor. up, my lords.", "my horse, varlet! lackey! ha!", "o brave spirit!", "", "", "cousin orlans.", "now, my lord constable?", "hark how our steeds for present service neigh.", "mount them and make incision in their hides, that their hot blood may spin in english eyes and dout them with superfluous courage. ha!", "what, will you have them weep our horses' blood? how shall we then behold their natural tears?"], ["the english are embattled, you french peers.", "to horse, you gallant princes, straight to horse. do but behold yond poor and starvd band, and your fair show shall suck away their souls, leaving them but the shales and husks of men. there is not work enough for all our hands, scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins to give each naked curtal axe a stain, that our french gallants shall today draw out and sheathe for lack of sport. let us but blow on them, the vapor of our valor will o'erturn them. 'tis positive against all exceptions, lords, that our superfluous lackeys and our peasants, who in unnecessary action swarm about our squares of battle, were enough to purge this field of such a hilding foe, though we upon this mountain's basis by took stand for idle speculation, but that our honors must not. what's to say? a very little little let us do, and all is done. then let the trumpets sound the tucket sonance and the note to mount, for our approach shall so much dare the field that england shall couch down in fear and yield.", "why do you stay so long, my lords of france? yond island carrions, desperate of their bones, ill-favoredly become the morning field. their ragged curtains poorly are let loose, and our air shakes them passing scornfully. big mars seems bankrupt in their beggared host and faintly through a rusty beaver peeps."], ["the horsemen sit like fixd candlesticks with torch staves in their hand, and their poor jades lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips, the gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes, and in their pale dull mouths the gemeled bit lies foul with chawed grass, still and motionless. and their executors, the knavish crows, fly o'er them all, impatient for their hour. description cannot suit itself in words to demonstrate the life of such a battle in life so lifeless, as it shows itself.", "they have said their prayers, and they stay for death.", "shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits, and give their fasting horses provender, and after fight with them?", "i stay but for my guard. on, to the field! i will the banner from a trumpet take and use it for my haste. come, come away. the sun is high, and we outwear the day."], ["where is the king?", "the king himself is rode to view their battle.", "of fighting men they have full threescore thousand.", "there's five to one. besides, they all are fresh.", "god's arm strike with us! 'tis a fearful odds. god be wi' you, princes all. i'll to my charge. if we no more meet till we meet in heaven, then joyfully, my noble lord of bedford, my dear lord gloucester, and my good lord exeter, and my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu.", "farewell, good salisbury, and good luck go with thee.", "farewell, kind lord. fight valiantly today. and yet i do thee wrong to mind thee of it, for thou art framed of the firm truth of valor.", "he is as full of valor as of kindness, princely in both."], ["oh, that we now had here but one ten thousand of those men in england that do no work today.", "what's he that wishes so? my cousin westmoreland? no, my fair cousin. if we are marked to die, we are enough to do our country loss; and if to live, the fewer men, the greater share of honor. god's will, i pray thee wish not one man more. by jove, i am not covetous for gold nor care i who doth feed upon my cost; it yearns me not if men my garments wear; such outward things dwell not in my desires. but if it be a sin to covet honor, i am the most offending soul alive. no, faith, my coz, wish not a man from england. god's peace, i would not lose so great an honor as one man more, methinks, would share from me, for the best hope i have. oh, do not wish one more! rather proclaim it, westmoreland, through my host, that he which hath no stomach to this fight, let him depart. his passport shall be made, and crowns for convoy put into his purse. we would not die in that man's company that fears his fellowship to die with us. this day is called the feast of crispian. he that outlives this day and comes safe home, will stand o' tiptoe when the day is named and rouse him at the name of crispian. he that shall see this day, and live old age, will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbors and say, \"tomorrow is saint crispian.\" then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars, and say, \"these wounds i had on crispin's day.\""], ["old men forget; yet all shall be forgot but he'll remember with advantages what feats he did that day. then shall our names, familiar in his mouth as household words, harry the king, bedford and exeter, warwick and talbot, salisbury and gloucester, be in their flowing cups freshly remembered. this story shall the good man teach his son, and crispin crispian shall ne'er go by, from this day to the ending of the world, but we in it shall be rememberd we few, we happy few, we band of brothers; for he today that sheds his blood with me shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile, this day shall gentle his condition; and gentlemen in england now abed shall think themselves accursed they were not here, and hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks that fought with us upon saint crispin's day.", "my sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed. the french are bravely in their battles set, and will with all expedience charge on us.", "all things are ready if our minds be so.", "perish the man whose mind is backward now!", "thou dost not wish more help from england, coz?", "god's will, my liege, would you and i alone, without more help, could fight this royal battle!"], ["why, now thou hast unwished five thousand men, which likes me better than to wish us one. you know your places. god be with you all. tucket", "once more i come to know of thee, king harry, if for thy ransom thou wilt now compound, before thy most assurd overthrow. for certainly thou art so near the gulf thou needs must be englutted. besides, in mercy, the constable desires thee thou wilt mind thy followers of repentance, that their souls may make a peaceful and a sweet retire from off these fields where, wretches, their poor bodies must lie and fester.", "who hath sent thee now?", "the constable of france.", "i pray thee, bear my former answer back. bid them achieve me and then sell my bones. good god, why should they mock poor fellows thus? the man that once did sell the lion's skin while the beast lived was killed with hunting him. a many of our bodies shall no doubt find native graves, upon the which, i trust, shall witness live in brass of this day's work. and those that leave their valiant bones in france, dying like men though buried in your dunghills, they shall be famed; for there the sun shall greet them and draw their honors reeking up to heaven, leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,"], ["the smell whereof shall breed a plague in france. mark, then, abounding valor in our english, that being dead, like to the bullet's crazing, break out into a second course of mischief, killing in relapse of mortality. let me speak proudly: tell the constable we are but warriors for the working day; our gayness and our gilt are all besmirched with rainy marching in the painful field. there's not a piece of feather in our host good argument, i hope, we will not fly and time hath worn us into slovenry. but, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim, and my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night they'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck the gay new coats o'er the french soldiers' heads and turn them out of service. if they do this, as, if god please, they shall, my ransom then will soon be levied. herald, save thou thy labor. come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald. they shall have none, i swear, but these my joints, which, if they have, as i will leave 'em them, shall yield them little. tell the constable.", "i shall, king harry. and so fare thee well. thou never shalt hear herald anymore.", "i fear thou wilt once more come again for a ransom."], ["my lord, most humbly on my knee i beg the leading of the vaward.", "take it, brave york. now, soldiers, march away, and how thou pleasest, god, dispose the day."], ["yield, cur.", "", "qualtitie calmie custure me. art thou a gentleman? what is thy name? discuss.", "", "o seigneur dew should be a gentleman. perpend my words, o seigneur dew, and mark: o seigneur dew, thou diest on point of fox, except, o seigneur, thou do give to me egregious ransom.", "", "moy shall not serve. i will have forty moys, or i will fetch thy rim out at thy throat in drops of crimson blood.", ""], ["brass, cur? thou damned and luxurious mountain goat, offer'st me brass?", "", "say'st thou me so? is that a ton of moys? come hither, boy. ask me this slave in french what is his name.", "", "", "he says his name is master fer.", "master fer. i'll fer him, and firk him, and ferret him. discuss the same in french unto him.", "i do not know the french for \"fer,\" and \"ferret,\" and \"firk.\"", "bid him prepare, for i will cut his throat.", "", "", "owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy, peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns, or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword."], ["", "what are his words?", "he prays you to save his life. he is a gentleman of a good house, and for his ransom he will give you two hundred crowns.", "tell him my fury shall abate, and i the crowns will take.", "", "", "", "expound unto me, boy.", "he gives you upon his knees a thousand thanks, and he esteems himself happy that he hath fall'n into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most brave, valorous, and thrice- worthy seigneur of england.", "as i suck blood, i will some mercy show. follow me."], ["", "i did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart. but the saying is true: \"the empty vessel makes the greatest sound.\" bardolph and nym had ten times more valor than this roaring devil i' th' old play, that everyone may pare his nails with a wooden dagger, and they are both hanged, and so would this be if he durst steal any thing adventurously. i must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of our camp. the french might have a good prey of us if he knew of it, for there is none to guard it but boys."], ["", "", "all is confounded, all! reproach and everlasting shame sits mocking in our plumes.", "do not run away.", "why, all our ranks are broke.", "o perdurable shame! let's stab ourselves. be these the wretches that we played at dice for?", "is this the king we sent to for his ransom?", "shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame! let us die. in once more! back again! and he that will not follow bourbon now, let him go hence, and with his cap in hand like a base pander hold the chamber door, whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog, his fairest daughter is contaminate.", "disorder, that hath spoiled us, friend us now. let us on heaps go offer up our lives."], ["we are enough yet living in the field to smother up the english in our throngs, if any order might be thought upon.", "the devil take order now! i'll to the throng. let life be short, else shame will be too long."], ["well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen, but all's not done. yet keep the french the field.", "the duke of york commends him to your majesty.", "lives he, good uncle? thrice within this hour i saw him down, thrice up again and fighting. from helmet to the spur, all blood he was.", "in which array, brave soldier, doth he lie, larding the plain, and by his bloody side, yoke-fellow to his honor-owing wounds, the noble earl of suffolk also lies. suffolk first died, and york, all haggled over, comes to him where in gore he lay insteeped and takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes that bloodily did yawn upon his face. and cries aloud, \"tarry, my cousin suffolk. my soul shall thine keep company to heaven. tarry, sweet soul, for mine; then fly abreast, as in this glorious and well-foughten field we kept together in our chivalry.\" upon these words i came and cheered him up. he smiled me in the face, raught me his hand, and with a feeble grip, says \"dear my lord, commend my service to my sovereign.\" so did he turn, and over suffolk's neck"], ["he threw his wounded arm and kissed his lips, and so, espoused to death, with blood he sealed a testament of noble-ending love. the pretty and sweet manner of it forced those waters from me which i would have stopped, but i had not so much of man in me, and all my mother came into mine eyes and gave me up to tears.", "i blame you not, for, hearing this, i must perforce compound with mistful eyes, or they will issue too.", "but hark, what new alarum is this same? the french have reinforced their scattered men. then every soldier kill his prisoners. give the word through."], ["kill the poys and the luggage! 'tis expressly against the law of arms. 'tis as arrant a piece of knavery, mark you now, as can be offert, in your conscience now, is it not?", "'tis certain there's not a boy left alive, and the cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha' done this slaughter. besides, they have burned and carried away all that was in the king's tent, wherefore the king, most worthily, hath caused every soldier to cut his prisoner's throat. oh, 'tis a gallant king!", "ay, he was porn at monmouth, captain gower. what call you the town's name where alexander the pig was born?", "alexander the great.", "why, i pray you, is not \"pig\" great? the pig, or the great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous are all one reckonings, save the phrase is a little variations.", "i think alexander the great was born in macedon. his father was called philip of macedon, as i take it.", "i think it is in macedon where alexander is porn. i tell you, captain, if you look in the maps of the 'orld, i warrant you shall find, in the comparisons between macedon and monmouth, that the situations, look you, is both alike."], ["there is a river in macedon, and there is also, moreover, a river at monmouth. it is called wye at monmouth, but it is out of my prains what is the name of the other river. but 'tis all one; 'tis alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. if you mark alexander's life well, harry of monmouth's life is come after it indifferent well, for there is figures in all things. alexander, god knows and you know, in his rages and his furies and his wraths and his cholers and his moods and his displeasures and his indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in his prains, did, in his ales and his angers, look you, kill his best friend, cleitus.", "our king is not like him in that. he never killed any of his friends.", "it is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales out of my mouth ere it is made and finished. i speak but in the figures and comparisons of it. as alexander killed his friend cleitus, being in his ales and his cups, so also harry monmouth, being in his right wits and his good judgments, turned away the fat knight with the great-belly doublet; he was full of jests, and gipes and knaveries, and mocks i have forgot his name.", "sir john falstaff.", "that is he. i'll tell you, there is good men porn at monmouth.", "here comes his majesty."], ["i was not angry since i came to france until this instant. take a trumpet, herald. ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill. if they will fight with us, bid them come down, or void the field. they do offend our sight. if they'll do neither, we will come to them and make them skirr away as swift as stones enforcd from the old assyrian slings. besides, we'll cut the throats of those we have, and not a man of them that we shall take shall taste our mercy. go and tell them so.", "here comes the herald of the french, my liege.", "his eyes are humbler than they used to be.", "how now, what means this, herald? know'st thou not that i have fined these bones of mine for ransom? com'st thou again for ransom?", "no, great king. i come to thee for charitable license, that we may wander o'er this bloody field to book our dead and then to bury them; to sort our nobles from our common men, for many of our princes woe the while! lie drowned and soaked in mercenary blood. so do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs in blood of princes, and the wounded steeds fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage yerk out their armd heels at their dead masters, killing them twice. oh, give us leave, great king, to view the field in safety and dispose of their dead bodies."], ["i tell thee truly, herald, i know not if the day be ours or no, for yet a many of your horsemen peer and gallop o'er the field.", "the day is yours.", "praised be god, and not our strength, for it! what is this castle called that stands hard by?", "they call it agincourt.", "then call we this the field of agincourt, fought on the day of crispin crispianus.", "your grandfather of famous memory, an't please your majesty, and your great-uncle edward the plack prince of wales, as i have read in the chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in france.", "they did, fluellen.", "your majesty says very true. if your majesties is remembered of it, the welshmen did good service in a garden where leeks did grow, wearing leeks in their monmouth caps, which, your majesty know, to this hour is an honorable badge of the service. and i do believe your majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek upon saint tavy's day."], ["i wear it for a memorable honor, for i am welsh, you know, good countryman.", "all the water in wye cannot wash your majesty's welsh plood out of your pody, i can tell you that: god pless it and preserve it as long as it pleases his grace and his majesty too.", "thanks, good my countryman.", "by jeshu, i am your majesty's countryman, i care not who know it. i will confess it to all the 'orld. i need not to be ashamed of your majesty, praised be god, so long as your majesty is an honest man.", "god keep me so. our heralds go with him. bring me just notice of the numbers dead on both our parts. williams call yonder fellow hither.", "soldier, you must come to the king.", "soldier, why wear'st thou that glove in thy cap?", "an't please your majesty, 'tis the gage of one that i should fight withal, if he be alive.", "an englishman?", "an 't please your majesty, a rascal that swaggered with me last night, who, if alive and ever dare to challenge this glove, i have sworn to take him a box o' th' ear, or if i can see my glove in his cap, which he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear if alive, i will strike it out soundly."], ["what think you, captain fluellen, is it fit this soldier keep his oath?", "he is a craven and a villain else, an 't please your majesty, in my conscience.", "it may be his enemy is a gentleman of great sort, quite from the answer of his degree.", "though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is, as lucifer and beelzebub himself, it is necessary, look your grace, that he keep his vow and his oath. if he be perjured, see you now, his reputation is as arrant a villain and a jack sauce as ever his black shoe trod upon god's ground and his earth, in my conscience, la.", "then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meet'st the fellow.", "so i will, my liege, as i live.", "who serv'st thou under?", "under captain gower, my liege.", "gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the wars.", "call him hither to me, soldier.", "i will, my liege."], ["here, fluellen, wear thou this favor for me and stick it in thy cap. williams' fluellen when alenon and myself were down together, i plucked this glove from his helm. if any man challenge this, he is a friend to alenon and an enemy to our person. if thou encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou dost me love.", "your grace does me as great honors as can be desired in the hearts of his subjects. i would fain see the man that has but two legs that shall find himself aggrieved at this glove, that is all; but i would fain see it once, an please god of his grace that i might see.", "know'st thou gower?", "he is my dear friend, an please you.", "pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to my tent.", "i will fetch him.", "my lord of warwick and my brother gloucester, follow fluellen closely at the heels. the glove which i have given him for a favor may haply purchase him a box o' th' ear. it is the soldier's. i by bargain should wear it myself. follow, good cousin warwick."], ["if that the soldier strike him, as i judge by his blunt bearing he will keep his word, some sudden mischief may arise of it, for i do know fluellen valiant and, touched with choler, hot as gunpowder, and quickly will return an injury. follow, and see there be no harm between them. go you with me, uncle of exeter."], ["i warrant it is to knight you, captain.", "god's will and his pleasure, captain, i beseech you now, come apace to the king. there is more good toward you peradventure than is in your knowledge to dream of.", "sir, know you this glove?", "know the glove! i know the glove is a glove.", "i know this, and thus i challenge it.", "'sblood, an arrant traitor as any 's in the universal world, or in france, or in england!", "how now, sir? you villain!", "do you think i'll be forsworn?", "stand away, captain gower. i will give treason his payment into plows, i warrant you.", "i am no traitor.", "that's a lie in thy throat. i charge you in his majesty's name, apprehend him. he's a friend of the duke alenon's."], ["how now, how now, what's the matter?", "my lord of warwick, here is, praised be god for it, a most contagious treason come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a summer's day.", "here is his majesty.", "how now, what's the matter?", "my liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that, look your grace, has struck the glove which your majesty is take out of the helmet of alenon.", "my liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow of it. and he that i gave it to in change promised to wear it in his cap. i promised to strike him if he did. i met this man with my glove in his cap, and i have been as good as my word.", "your majesty, hear now, saving your majesty's manhood, what an arrant, rascally, beggarly, lousy knave it is. i hope your majesty is pear me testimony and witness, and will avouchment that this is the glove of alenon that your majesty is give me, in your conscience now.", "give me thy glove, soldier. look, here is the fellow of it. 'twas i indeed thou promised'st to strike, and thou hast given me most bitter terms."], ["an please your majesty, let his neck answer for it, if there is any martial law in the world.", "how canst thou make me satisfaction?", "all offenses, my lord, come from the heart. never came any from mine that might offend your majesty.", "it was ourself thou didst abuse.", "your majesty came not like yourself. you appeared to me but as a common man. witness the night, your garments, your lowliness. and what your highness suffered under that shape, i beseech you take it for your own fault and not mine, for, had you been as i took you for, i made no offense. therefore, i beseech your highness pardon me.", "here, uncle exeter, fill this glove with crowns and give it to this fellow. keep it, fellow, and wear it for an honor in thy cap till i do challenge it. give him the crowns. and, captain, you must needs be friends with him.", "by this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough in his belly. hold, there is twelve pence for you, and i pray you to serve god and keep you out of prawls and prabbles and quarrels and dissensions, and i warrant you it is the better for you.", "i will none of your money."], ["it is with a good will. i can tell you it will serve you to mend your shoes. come, wherefore should you be so pashful? your shoes is not so good. 'tis a good silling, i warrant you, or i will change it.", "now, herald, are the dead numbered?", "here is the number of the slaughtered french.", "what prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?", "charles, duke of orlans, nephew to the king; john, duke of bourbon, and lord bouciqualt. of other lords and barons, knights and squires, full fifteen hundred, besides common men.", "this note doth tell me of ten thousand french that in the field lie slain. of princes in this number and nobles bearing banners, there lie dead one hundred twenty-six. added to these, of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen, eight thousand and four hundred, of the which, five hundred were but yesterday dubbed knights. so that in these ten thousand they have lost, there are but sixteen hundred mercenaries. the rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires, and gentlemen of blood and quality. the names of those their nobles that lie dead: charles delabreth, high constable of france; jaques of chatillon, admiral of france; the master of the crossbows, lord rambures;"], ["great master of france, the brave sir guichard dauphin; john, duke of alenon; anthony, duke of brabant, the brother of the duke of burgundy, and edward, duke of bar. of lusty earls: grandpr and roussi, faulconbridge and foix, beaumont and marle, vaudemont and lestrale. here was a royal fellowship of death. where is the number of our english dead?", "edward the duke of york, the earl of suffolk, sir richard ketly, davy gam, esquire; none else of name, and of all other men but five and twenty. o god, thy arm was here, and not to us but to thy arm alone ascribe we all! when, without stratagem, but in plain shock and even play of battle, was ever known so great and little loss on one part and on th' other? take it, god, for it is none but thine.", "'tis wonderful.", "come, go we in procession to the village, and be it death proclaimd through our host to boast of this or take that praise from god which is his only.", "is it not lawful, an please your majesty, to tell how many is killed?", "yes, captain, but with this acknowledgement: that god fought for us.", "yes, my conscience, he did us great good."], ["do we all holy rites. let there be sung and the dead with charity enclosed in clay, and then to calais, and to england then, where ne'er from france arrived more happy men."], ["vouchsafe to those that have not read the story that i may prompt them; and of such as have, i humbly pray them to admit th' excuse of time, of numbers, and due course of things, which cannot in their huge and proper life be here presented. now we bear the king toward calais. grant him there. there seen, heave him away upon your wingd thoughts athwart the sea. behold, the english beach pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys, whose shouts and claps outvoice the deep-mouthed sea, which like a mighty whiffler 'fore the king seems to prepare his way. so let him land, and solemnly see him set on to london. so swift a pace hath thought that even now you may imagine him upon blackheath, where that his lords desire him to have borne his bruisd helmet and his bended sword before him through the city. he forbids it, being free from vainness and self-glorious pride, giving full trophy, signal, and ostent quite from himself, to god. but now behold, in the quick forge and workinghouse of thought, how london doth pour out her citizens. the mayor and all his brethren in best sort, like to the senators of th' antique rome, with the plebeians swarming at their heels, go forth and fetch their conquering caesar in as, by a lower but loving likelihood,"], ["were now the general of our gracious empress, as in good time he may, from ireland coming, bringing rebellion broached on his sword, how many would the peaceful city quit to welcome him! much more, and much more cause, did they this harry. now in london place him (as yet the lamentation of the french invites the king of england's stay at home; the emperor's coming in behalf of france to order peace between them) and omit all the occurrences, whatever chanced, till harry's back return again to france. there must we bring him, and myself have played the interim, by remembering you 'tis past. then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance after your thoughts, straight back again to france."], ["nay, that's right. but why wear you your leek today? saint davy's day is past.", "there is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things. i will tell you as my friend, captain gower. the rascally, scald, beggarly, lousy, pragging knave, pistol, which you and yourself and all the world know to be no petter than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is come to me and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, and bid me eat my leek. it was in place where i could not breed no contention with him, but i will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till i see him once again, and then i will tell him a little piece of my desires.", "why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.", "'tis no matter for his swellings, nor his turkey-cocks. god pless you, aunchient pistol, you scurvy, lousy knave, god pless you.", "ha, art thou bedlam? dost thou thirst, base trojan, to have me fold up parca's fatal web? hence. i am qualmish at the smell of leek.", "i peseech you heartily, scurvy, lousy knave, at my desires, and my requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you, this leek. because, look you, you do not love it, nor your affections and your appetites and your digestions does not agree with it, i would desire you to eat it."], ["not for cadwallader and all his goats.", "there is one goat for you. (strikes him) will you be so good, scald knave, as eat it?", "base trojan, thou shalt die.", "you say very true, scald knave, when god's will is. i will desire you to live in the meantime and eat your victuals. come, there is sauce for it. (strikes him) you called me yesterday \"mountain squire,\" but i will make you today a squire of low degree. i pray you, fall to. if you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.", "enough, captain. you have astonished him.", "i say i will make him eat some part of my leek, or i will peat his pate four days. bite, i pray you. it is good for your green wound and your ploody coxcomb.", "must i bite?", "yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question, too, and ambiguities.", "by this leek, i will most horribly revenge. i eat and eat, i swear", "eat, i pray you. will you have some more sauce to your leek? there is not enough leek to swear by.", "quiet thy cudgel. thou dost see i eat."], ["much good do you, scald knave, heartily. nay, pray you throw none away. the skin is good for your broken coxcomb. when you take occasions to see leeks hereafter, i pray you, mock at 'em, that is all.", "good.", "ay, leeks is good. hold you, there is a groat to heal your pate.", "me, a groat?", "yes, verily, and in truth you shall take it, or i have another leek in my pocket, which you shall eat.", "i take thy groat in earnest of revenge.", "if i owe you anything, i will pay you in cudgels. you shall be a woodmonger and buy nothing of me but cudgels. god be wi' you and keep you and heal your pate.", "all hell shall stir for this.", "go, go. you are a counterfeit cowardly knave. will you mock at an ancient tradition begun upon an honorable respect and worn as a memorable trophy of predeceased valor, and dare not avouch in your deeds any of your words? i have seen you gleeking and galling at this gentleman twice or thrice. you thought because he could not speak english in the native garb, he could not therefore handle an english cudgel. you find it otherwise, and henceforth let a welsh correction teach you a good english condition. fare you well."], ["doth fortune play the huswife with me now? news have i that my nell is dead i' th' spital of a malady of france, and there my rendezvous is quite cut off. old i do wax, and from my weary limbs honor is cudgeled. well, bawd i'll turn, and something lean to cutpurse of quick hand. to england will i steal, and there i'll steal. and patches will i get unto these cudgeled scars, and swear i got them in the gallia wars."], ["unto our brother france and to our sister, health and fair time of day. joy and good wishes to our most fair and princely cousin katherine. and, as a branch and member of this royalty, by whom this great assembly is contrived, we do salute you, duke of burgundy. and princes french, and peers, health to you all. peace to this meeting wherefore we are met.", "right joyous are we to behold your face, most worthy brother england. fairly met. so are you, princes english, every one.", "so happy be the issue, brother england, of this good day and of this gracious meeting, as we are now glad to behold your eyes your eyes which hitherto have borne in them against the french that met them in their bent the fatal balls of murdering basilisks. the venom of such looks, we fairly hope, have lost their quality, and that this day shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.", "to cry \"amen\" to that, thus we appear.", "you english princes all, i do salute you."], ["my duty to you both, on equal love, great kings of france and england. that i have labored with all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavors, to bring your most imperial majesties unto this bar and royal interview, your mightiness on both parts best can witness. since, then, my office hath so far prevailed that face to face and royal eye to eye you have congreeted. let it not disgrace me if i demand before this royal view what rub or what impediment there is why that the naked, poor, and mangled peace, dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births, should not in this best garden of the world, our fertile france, put up her lovely visage? alas, she hath from france too long been chased, and all her husbandry doth lie on heaps, corrupting in its own fertility. her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart, unprund, dies. her hedges, even-pleached, like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair, put forth disordered twigs. her fallow leas the darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts that should deracinate such savagery. the even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth the freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover, wanting the scythe, withal uncorrected, rank, conceives by idleness, and nothing teems but hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burrs, losing both beauty and utility. and as our vineyards, fallows, meads, and hedges, defective in their natures, grow to wildness, even so our houses and ourselves and children have lost, or do not learn for want of time, the sciences that should become our country, but grow like savages, as soldiers will"], ["that nothing do but meditate on blood, to swearing and stern looks, diffused attire, and everything that seems unnatural. which to reduce into our former favor you are assembled, and my speech entreats that i may know the let why gentle peace should not expel these inconveniences and bless us with her former qualities.", "if, duke of burgundy, you would the peace, whose want gives growth to th' imperfections which you have cited, you must buy that peace with full accord to all our just demands, whose tenors and particular effects you have, enscheduled briefly, in your hands.", "the king hath heard them, to the which as yet there is no answer made.", "well then, the peace which you before so urged lies in his answer.", "i have but with a cursitory eye o'erglanced the articles. pleaseth your grace to appoint some of your council presently to sit with us once more with better heed to resurvey them, we will suddenly pass our accept and peremptory answer.", "brother, we shall. go, uncle exeter, and brother clarence, and you, brother gloucester, warwick and huntingdon, go with the king and take with you free power to ratify, augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best shall see advantageable for our dignity, anything in or out of our demands,"], ["and we'll consign thereto. will you, fair sister, go with the princes or stay here with us?", "our gracious brother, i will go with them. haply a woman's voice may do some good, when articles too nicely urged be stood on.", "yet leave our cousin katherine here with us. she is our capital demand, comprised within the forerank of our articles.", "she hath good leave.", "fair katherine, and most fair, will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms such as will enter at a lady's ear and plead his love suit to her gentle heart?", "your majesty shall mock at me. i cannot speak your england.", "o fair katherine, if you will love me soundly with your french heart, i will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your english tongue. do you like me, kate?", "i cannot tell what is \"like me.\"", "an angel is like you, kate, and you are like an angel.", "alice", ""], ["i said so, dear katherine; and i must not blush to affirm it.", "", "what says she, fair one? that the tongues of men are full of deceits?", "oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits; dat is de princess.", "the princess is the better englishwoman. i' faith, kate, my wooing is fit for thy understanding. i am glad thou canst speak no better english, for if thou couldst, thou wouldst find me such a plain king that thou wouldst think i had sold my farm to buy my crown. i know no ways to mince it in love, but directly to say, \"i love you.\" then if you urge me farther than to say, \"do you, in faith?\" i wear out my suit. give me your answer, i' faith, do; and so clap hands and a bargain. how say you, lady?", "me understand vell.", "marry, if you would put me to verses or to dance for your sake, kate, why you undid me. for the one, i have neither words nor measure; and for the other, i have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable measure in strength. if i could win a lady at leapfrog or by vaulting into my saddle with my armor on my back, under the correction of bragging be it spoken, i should quickly leap into a wife. or if i might buffet for my love or bound my horse for her favors, i could lay on like a butcher and sit like a jackanapes, never off. but, before god, kate, i cannot look greenly nor gasp out my eloquence, nor i have no cunning in protestation, only"], ["downright oaths, which i never use till urged, nor never break for urging. if thou canst love a fellow of this temper, kate, whose face is not worth sunburning, that never looks in his glass for love of anything he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook. i speak to thee plain soldier. if thou canst love me for this, take me. if not, to say to thee that i shall die is true, but for thy love, by the lord, no. yet i love thee too. and while thou liv'st, dear kate, take a fellow of plain and uncoined constancy, for he perforce must do thee right because he hath not the gift to woo in other places. for these fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into ladies' favors, they do always reason themselves out again. what? a speaker is but a prater, a rhyme is but a ballad, a good leg will fall, a straight back will stoop, a black beard will turn white, a curled pate will grow bald, a fair face will wither, a full eye will wax hollow, but a good heart, kate, is the sun and the moon, or rather the sun and not the moon, for it shines bright and never changes but keeps his course truly. if thou would have such a one, take me. and take me, take a soldier. take a soldier, take a king. and what say'st thou then to my love? speak, my fair, and fairly, i pray thee.", "is it possible dat i sould love de enemy of france?", "no, it is not possible you should love the enemy of france, kate. but, in loving me, you should love the friend of france, for i love france so well that i will not part with a village of it. i will have it all mine. and, kate, when france is mine and i am yours, then yours is france and you are mine.", "i cannot tell wat is dat."], ["no, kate? i will tell thee in french, which i am sure will hang upon my tongue like a new-married wife about her husband's neck, hardly to be shook off. je quand sur le possession de france, et quand vous avez le possession de moi let me see, what then? saint denis be my speed! donc vtre est france et vous tes mienne. it is as easy for me, kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more french. i shall never move thee in french, unless it be to laugh at me.", "", "no, faith, is 't not, kate, but thy speaking of my tongue, and i thine, most truly-falsely must needs be granted to be much at one. but, kate, dost thou understand thus much english? canst thou love me?", "i cannot tell.", "can any of your neighbors tell, kate? i'll ask them. come, i know thou lovest me; and at night, when you come into your closet, you'll question this gentlewoman about me, and, i know, kate, you will to her dispraise those parts in me that you love with your heart. but, good kate, mock me mercifully, the rather, gentle princess, because i love thee cruelly. if ever thou beest mine, kate, as i have a saving faith within me tells me thou shalt, i get thee with scambling, and thou must therefore needs prove a good soldier-breeder. shall not thou and i, between saint denis"], ["and saint george, compound a boy, half french, half english, that shall go to constantinople and take the turk by the beard? shall we not? what say'st thou, my fair flower de luce?", "i do not know dat.", "no, 'tis hereafter to know, but now to promise. do but now promise, kate, you will endeavor for your french part of such a boy; and for my english moiety take the word of a king and a bachelor. how answer you, la plus belle", "your majeste ave fausse french enough to deceive de most sage dat is france.", "now fie upon my false french. by mine honor, in true english, i love thee, kate. by which honor i dare not swear thou lovest me, yet my blood begins to flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding the poor and untempering effect of my visage. now, beshrew my father's ambition! he was thinking of civil wars when he got me; therefore was i created with a stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that when i come to woo ladies, i fright them. but, in faith, kate, the elder i wax, the better i shall appear. my comfort is that old age, that ill layer-up of beauty, can do no more spoil upon my face. thou hast me, if thou hast me, at the worst, and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and better. and therefore tell me, most fair katherine, will you have me? put off your maiden blushes, avouch the thoughts of your heart with the looks of an empress, take me by the hand, and say \"harry of england, i am thine,\" which word thou shalt no sooner bless mine ear withal, but i will tell"], ["thee aloud \"england is thine, ireland is thine, france is thine, and harry plantagenet is thine,\" who, though i speak it before his face, if he be not fellow with the best king, thou shalt find the best king of good fellows. come, your answer in broken music, for thy voice is music and thy english broken. therefore, queen of all, katherine, break thy mind to me in broken english. wilt thou have me?", "dat is as it sall please de", "nay, it will please him well, kate; it shall please him, kate.", "den it sall also content me.", "upon that i kiss your hand, and i call you my queen.", "", "then i will kiss your lips, kate.", "", "madam my interpreter, what says she?", "dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies of france i cannot tell wat is anglish.", "to kiss."], ["your bettre", "it is not a fashion for the maids in france to kiss before they are married, would she say?", "", "o kate, nice customs curtsy to great kings. dear kate, you and i cannot be confined within the weak list of a country's fashion. we are the makers of manners, kate, and the liberty that follows our places stops the mouth of all find- faults, as i will do yours for upholding the nice fashion of your country in denying me a kiss. therefore, patiently and yielding. you have witchcraft in your lips, kate. there is more eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues of the french council, and they should sooner persuade harry of england than a general petition of monarchs. here comes your father.", "god save your majesty. my royal cousin, teach you our princess english?", "i would have her learn, my fair cousin, how perfectly i love her, and that is good english.", "is she not apt?", "our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not smooth, so that, having neither the voice nor the heart of flattery about me, i cannot so conjure up the spirit of love in her that he will appear in his true likeness."], ["pardon the frankness of my mirth if i answer you for that. if you would conjure in her, you must make a circle; if conjure up love in her in his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind. can you blame her then, being a maid yet rosed over with the virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing self? it were, my lord, a hard condition for a maid to consign to.", "yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.", "they are then excused, my lord, when they see not what they do.", "then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.", "i will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will teach her to know my meaning, for maids, well summered and warm kept, are like flies at bartholomew-tide: blind, though they have their eyes; and then they will endure handling, which before would not abide looking on.", "this moral ties me over to time and a hot summer. and so i shall catch the fly, your cousin, in the latter end and she must be blind too.", "as love is, my lord, before it loves.", "it is so. and you may, some of you, thank love for my blindness, who cannot see many a fair french city for one fair french maid that stands in my way.", "yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turned into a maid, for they are all girdled with maiden walls that war hath never entered."], ["shall kate be my wife?", "so please you.", "i am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may wait on her. so the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show me the way to my will.", "we have consented to all terms of reason.", "is 't so, my lords of england?", "the king hath granted every article, his daughter first, and, in sequel, all, according to their firm proposed natures.", "only he hath not yet subscribd this: where your majesty demands that the king of france, having any occasion to write for matter of grant, shall name your highness in this form and with this addition, in french: ; and thus in latin:", "nor this i have not, brother, so denied but your request shall make me let it pass.", "i pray you, then, in love and dear alliance, let that one article rank with the rest, and thereupon give me your daughter.", "take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up issue to me, that the contending kingdoms of france and england, whose very shores look pale with envy of each other's happiness,"], ["may cease their hatred, and this dear conjunction plant neighborhood and christian-like accord in their sweet bosoms, that never war advance his bleeding sword 'twixt england and fair france.", "amen.", "now welcome, kate, and bear me witness all that here i kiss her as my sovereign queen.", "god, the best maker of all marriages, combine your hearts in one, your realms in one. as man and wife, being two, are one in love, so be there 'twixt your kingdoms such a spousal that never may ill office or fell jealousy, which troubles oft the bed of blessd marriage, thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms to make divorce of their incorporate league, that english may as french, french englishmen, receive each other. god speak this \"amen\"!", "amen.", "prepare we for our marriage; on which day, my lord of burgundy, we'll take your oath, and all the peers', for surety of our leagues. then shall i swear to kate, and you to me, and may our oaths well kept and prosp'rous be."], ["thus far with rough and all-unable pen our bending author hath pursued the story, in little room confining mighty men, mangling by starts the full course of their glory. small time, but in that small most greatly lived this star of england. fortune made his sword, by which the world's best garden be achieved and of it left his son imperial lord. henry the sixth, in infant bands crowned king of france and england, did this king succeed, whose state so many had the managing that they lost france and made his england bleed, which oft our stage hath shown. and for their sake, in your fair minds let this acceptance take."]], [["hence! home, you idle creatures get you home! is this a holiday? what, know you not, being mechanical, you ought not walk upon a laboring day without the sign of your profession? speak, what trade art thou?", "why, sir, a carpenter.", "where is thy leather apron and thy rule? what dost thou with thy best apparel on? you, sir, what trade are you?", "truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, i am but, as you would say, a cobbler.", "but what trade art thou? answer me directly.", "a trade, sir, that i hope i may use with a safe conscience, which is, indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.", "what trade, thou knave? thou naughty knave, what trade?", "nay, i beseech you, sir, be not out with me. yet, if you be out, sir, i can mend you.", "what mean'st thou by that? \"mend\" me, thou saucy fellow?"], ["why, sir, cobble you.", "thou art a cobbler, art thou?", "truly, sir, all that i live by is with the awl. i meddle with no tradesman's matters nor women's matters, but withal i am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes. when they are in great danger, i recover them. as proper men as ever trod upon neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.", "but wherefore art not in thy shop today? why dost thou lead these men about the streets?", "truly, sir, to wear out their shoes to get myself into more work. but indeed, sir, we make holiday to see caesar and to rejoice in his triumph.", "wherefore rejoice? what conquest brings he home? what tributaries follow him to rome to grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels? you blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things, o you hard hearts, you crul men of rome, knew you not pompey? many a time and oft have you climbed up to walls and battlements, to towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops, your infants in your arms, and there have sat the livelong day with patient expectation to see great pompey pass the streets of rome. and when you saw his chariot but appear, have you not made an universal shout that tiber trembled underneath her banks to hear the replication of your sounds made in her concave shores? and do you now put on your best attire? and do you now cull out a holiday?"], ["and do you now strew flowers in his way that comes in triumph over pompey's blood? be gone! run to your houses, fall upon your knees, pray to the gods to intermit the plague that needs must light on this ingratitude.", "go, go, good countrymen, and for this fault, assemble all the poor men of your sort, draw them to tiber banks, and weep your tears into the channel till the lowest stream do kiss the most exalted shores of all.", "see whether their basest metal be not moved. they vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness. go you down that way towards the capitol. this way will i. disrobe the images if you do find them decked with ceremonies.", "may we do so? you know it is the feast of lupercal.", "it is no matter. let no images be hung with caesar's trophies. i'll about and drive away the vulgar from the streets. so do you too, where you perceive them thick. these growing feathers plucked from caesar's wing will make him fly an ordinary pitch, who else would soar above the view of men and keep us all in servile fearfulness."], ["calphurnia!", "peace, ho! caesar speaks.", "calphurnia!", "here, my lord.", "stand you directly in antonius' way when he doth run his course. antonius!", "caesar, my lord.", "forget not in your speed, antonius, to touch calphurnia, for our elders say the barren, touchd in this holy chase, shake off their sterile curse.", "i shall remember. when caesar says, \"do this,\" it is performed.", "set on, and leave no ceremony out.", "caesar!"], ["ha! who calls?", "bid every noise be still. peace yet again.", "who is it in the press that calls on me? i hear a tongue, shriller than all the music, cry \"caesar!\" speak. caesar is turned to hear.", "beware the ides of march.", "what man is that?", "a soothsayer bids you beware the ides of march.", "set him before me. let me see his face.", "fellow, come from the throng. look upon caesar.", "what sayst thou to me now? speak once again.", "beware the ides of march.", "he is a dreamer. let us leave him. pass!", "will you go see the order of the course?"], ["not i.", "i pray you, do.", "i am not gamesome. i do lack some part of that quick spirit that is in antony. let me not hinder, cassius, your desires. i'll leave you.", "brutus, i do observe you now of late i have not from your eyes that gentleness and show of love as i was wont to have. you bear too stubborn and too strange a hand over your friend that loves you.", "cassius, be not deceived. if i have veiled my look, i turn the trouble of my countenance merely upon myself. vexd i am of late with passions of some difference, conceptions only proper to myself, which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors. but let not therefore, my good friends, be grieved among which number, cassius, be you one nor construe any further my neglect than that poor brutus, with himself at war, forgets the shows of love to other men.", "then, brutus, i have much mistook your passion, by means whereof this breast of mine hath buried thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations. tell me, good brutus, can you see your face?", "no, cassius, for the eye sees not itself but by reflection, by some other things."], ["'tis just. and it is very much lamented, brutus, that you have no such mirrors as will turn your hidden worthiness into your eye that you might see your shadow. i have heard where many of the best respect in rome, except immortal caesar, speaking of brutus and groaning underneath this age's yoke, have wished that noble brutus had his eyes.", "into what dangers would you lead me, cassius, that you would have me seek into myself for that which is not in me?", "therefore, good brutus, be prepared to hear. and since you know you cannot see yourself so well as by reflection, i, your glass, will modestly discover to yourself that of yourself which you yet know not of. and be not jealous on me, gentle brutus. were i a common laugher, or did use to stale with ordinary oaths my love to every new protester, if you know that i do fawn on men and hug them hard and, after, scandal them, or if you know that i profess myself in banqueting to all the rout, then hold me dangerous.", "what means this shouting? i do fear, the people choose caesar for their king.", "ay, do you fear it? then must i think you would not have it so."], ["i would not, cassius. yet i love him well. but wherefore do you hold me here so long? what is it that you would impart to me? if it be aught toward the general good, set honor in one eye and death i' th' other, and i will look on both indifferently, for let the gods so speed me as i love the name of honor more than i fear death.", "i know that virtue to be in you, brutus, as well as i do know your outward favor. well, honor is the subject of my story. i cannot tell what you and other men think of this life, but, for my single self, i had as lief not be as live to be in awe of such a thing as i myself. i was born free as caesar. so were you. we both have fed as well, and we can both endure the winter's cold as well as he. for once upon a raw and gusty day, the troubled tiber chafing with her shores, caesar said to me, \"darest thou, cassius, now leap in with me into this angry flood and swim to yonder point?\" upon the word, accoutred as i was, i plungd in and bade him follow. so indeed he did. the torrent roared, and we did buffet it with lusty sinews, throwing it aside and stemming it with hearts of controversy. but ere we could arrive the point proposed, caesar cried, \"help me, cassius, or i sink!\" i, as aeneas, our great ancestor, did from the flames of troy upon his shoulder the old anchises bear, so from the waves of tiber did i the tired caesar. and this man"], ["is now become a god, and cassius is a wretched creature and must bend his body if caesar carelessly but nod on him. he had a fever when he was in spain, and when the fit was on him, i did mark how he did shake. 'tis true, this god did shake! his coward lips did from their color fly, and that same eye whose bend doth awe the world did lose his luster. i did hear him groan, ay, and that tongue of his that bade the romans mark him and write his speeches in their books \"alas,\" it cried, \"give me some drink, titinius,\" as a sick girl. ye gods, it doth amaze me a man of such a feeble temper should so get the start of the majestic world and bear the palm alone.", "another general shout! i do believe that these applauses are for some new honors that are heaped on caesar.", "why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world like a colossus, and we petty men walk under his huge legs and peep about to find ourselves dishonorable graves. men at some time are masters of their fates. the fault, dear brutus, is not in our stars but in ourselves, that we are underlings. brutus and caesar what should be in that \"caesar\"? why should that name be sounded more than yours? write them together, yours is as fair a name. sound them, it doth become the mouth as well. weigh them, it is as heavy. conjure with 'em,"], ["\"brutus\" will start a spirit as soon as \"caesar.\" now in the names of all the gods at once, upon what meat doth this our caesar feed that he is grown so great? age, thou art shamed! rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods! when went there by an age, since the great flood, but it was famed with more than with one man? when could they say till now, that talked of rome, that her wide walks encompassed but one man? now is it rome indeed, and room enough, when there is in it but one only man. oh, you and i have heard our fathers say, there was a brutus once that would have brooked th' eternal devil to keep his state in rome as easily as a king.", "that you do love me, i am nothing jealous. what you would work me to, i have some aim. how i have thought of this and of these times i shall recount hereafter. for this present, i would not, so with love i might entreat you, be any further moved. what you have said i will consider, what you have to say i will with patience hear, and find a time both meet to hear and answer such high things. till then, my noble friend, chew upon this: brutus had rather be a villager than to repute himself a son of rome under these hard conditions as this time is like to lay upon us.", "i am glad that my weak words have struck but thus much show of fire from brutus."], ["the games are done and caesar is returning.", "as they pass by, pluck casca by the sleeve, and he will, after his sour fashion, tell you what hath proceeded worthy note today.", "i will do so. but, look you, cassius, the angry spot doth glow on caesar's brow, and all the rest look like a chidden train. calphurnia's cheek is pale, and cicero looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes as we have seen him in the capitol being crossed in conference by some senators.", "casca will tell us what the matter is.", "antonio.", "caesar.", "antony let me have men about me that are fat, sleek-headed men and such as sleep a-nights. yond cassius has a lean and hungry look. he thinks too much. such men are dangerous.", "caesar fear him not, caesar. he's not dangerous. he is a noble roman and well given."], ["antony would he were fatter! but i fear him not. yet if my name were liable to fear, i do not know the man i should avoid so soon as that spare cassius. he reads much. he is a great observer, and he looks quite through the deeds of men. he loves no plays, as thou dost, antony. he hears no music. seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort as if he mocked himself and scorned his spirit that could be moved to smile at anything. such men as he be never at heart's ease whiles they behold a greater than themselves, and therefore are they very dangerous. i rather tell thee what is to be feared than what i fear, for always i am caesar. come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf, and tell me truly what thou think'st of him.", "brutus you pulled me by the cloak. would you speak with me?", "ay, casca. tell us what hath chanced today that caesar looks so sad.", "why, you were with him, were you not?", "i should not then ask casca what had chanced.", "why, there was a crown offered him; and, being offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand, thus; and then the people fell a-shouting."], ["what was the second noise for?", "why, for that too.", "they shouted thrice. what was the last cry for?", "why, for that too.", "was the crown offered him thrice?", "ay, marry, was 't, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler than other, and at every putting-by mine honest neighbors shouted.", "who offered him the crown?", "why, antony.", "tell us the manner of it, gentle casca.", "i can as well be hanged as tell the manner of it. it was mere foolery. i did not mark it. i saw mark antony offer him a crown (yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one of these coronets) and, as i told you, he put it by once but, for all that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it. then he offered it to him again, then he put it by again but, to my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it. and then he offered it the third time. he put it the third time by. and still, as he refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their chapped hands and threw up their sweaty night-caps and uttered such a deal of stinking breath because caesar refused the crown that it had almost choked caesar for he swooned and fell down at it. and for mine own part, i durst not laugh for fear of opening my lips and receiving the bad air."], ["but soft, i pray you. what, did caesar swoon?", "he fell down in the marketplace, and foamed at mouth, and was speechless.", "'tis very like. he hath the falling sickness.", "no, caesar hath it not. but you and i and honest casca, we have the falling sickness.", "i know not what you mean by that, but i am sure caesar fell down. if the tag-rag people did not clap him and hiss him according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to do the players in the theatre, i am no true man.", "what said he when he came unto himself?", "marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked me ope his doublet and offered them his throat to cut. an i had been a man of any occupation, if i would not have taken him at a word, i would i might go to hell among the rogues. and so he fell. when he came to himself again, he said, if he had done or said anything amiss, he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity. three or four wenches where i stood cried, \"alas, good soul!\" and forgave him with all their hearts. but there's no heed to be taken of them. if caesar had stabbed their mothers they would have done no less.", "and after that he came thus sad away?", "ay."], ["did cicero say anything?", "ay, he spoke greek.", "to what effect?", "nay, an i tell you that, i'll ne'er look you i' th' face again. but those that understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads. but, for mine own part, it was greek to me. i could tell you more news too. murellus and flavius, for pulling scarfs off caesar's images, are put to silence. fare you well. there was more foolery yet, if i could remember it.", "will you sup with me tonight, casca?", "no, i am promised forth.", "will you dine with me tomorrow?", "ay, if i be alive and your mind hold and your dinner worth the eating.", "good. i will expect you.", "do so. farewell both.", "what a blunt fellow is this grown to be! he was quick mettle when he went to school."], ["so is he now in execution of any bold or noble enterprise, however he puts on this tardy form. this rudeness is a sauce to his good wit, which gives men stomach to digest his words with better appetite.", "and so it is. for this time i will leave you. tomorrow, if you please to speak with me, i will come home to you. or, if you will, come home to me, and i will wait for you.", "i will do so. till then, think of the world.", "well, brutus, thou art noble. yet i see thy honorable mettle may be wrought from that it is disposed. therefore it is meet that noble minds keep ever with their likes, for who so firm that cannot be seduced? caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves brutus. if i were brutus now and he were cassius, he should not humor me. i will this night, in several hands, in at his windows throw, as if they came from several citizens, writings all tending to the great opinion that rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely caesar's ambition shall be glancd at. and after this let caesar seat him sure, for we will shake him, or worse days endure."], ["good even, casca. brought you caesar home? why are you breathless? and why stare you so?", "are not you moved when all the sway of earth shakes like a thing unfirm? o cicero, i have seen tempests when the scolding winds have rived the knotty oaks, and i have seen th' ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam to be exalted with the threatening clouds, but never till tonight, never till now, did i go through a tempest dropping fire. either there is a civil strife in heaven, or else the world, too saucy with the gods, incenses them to send destruction.", "why, saw you anything more wonderful?", "a common slave you know him well by sight held up his left hand, which did flame and burn like twenty torches joined, and yet his hand, not sensible of fire, remained unscorched. besides i ha' not since put up my sword against the capitol i met a lion, who glared upon me and went surly by, without annoying me. and there were drawn upon a heap a hundred ghastly women, transformd with their fear, who swore they saw men all in fire walk up and down the streets."], ["and yesterday the bird of night did sit even at noon-day upon the marketplace, hooting and shrieking. when these prodigies do so conjointly meet, let not men say, \"these are their reasons. they are natural.\" for i believe they are portentous things unto the climate that they point upon.", "indeed, it is a strange-disposd time. but men may construe things after their fashion, clean from the purpose of the things themselves. comes caesar to the capitol tomorrow?", "he doth, for he did bid antonius send word to you he would be there tomorrow.", "good night then, casca. this disturbd sky is not to walk in.", "farewell, cicero.", "who's there?", "a roman.", "casca, by your voice.", "your ear is good. cassius, what night is this!", "a very pleasing night to honest men.", "who ever knew the heavens menace so?"], ["those that have known the earth so full of faults. for my part, i have walked about the streets, submitting me unto the perilous night, and, thus unbracd, casca, as you see, have bared my bosom to the thunder-stone. and when the cross blue lightning seemed to open the breast of heaven, i did present myself even in the aim and very flash of it.", "but wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens? it is the part of men to fear and tremble when the most mighty gods by tokens send such dreadful heralds to astonish us.", "you are dull, casca, and those sparks of life that should be in a roman you do want, or else you use not. you look pale, and gaze, and put on fear, and cast yourself in wonder to see the strange impatience of the heavens. but if you would consider the true cause why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts, why birds and beasts from quality and kind, why old men fool and children calculate, why all these things change from their ordinance their natures and preformd faculties to monstrous quality why, you shall find that heaven hath infused them with these spirits to make them instruments of fear and warning unto some monstrous state. now could i, casca, name to thee a man most like this dreadful night, that thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars as doth the lion in the capitol"], ["a man no mightier than thyself or me in personal action, yet prodigious grown, and fearful as these strange eruptions are.", "'tis caesar that you mean. is it not, cassius?", "let it be who it is. for romans now have thews and limbs like to their ancestors, but woe the while! our fathers' minds are dead, and we are governed with our mothers' spirits. our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.", "indeed, they say the senators tomorrow mean to establish caesar as a king, and he shall wear his crown by sea and land in every place save here in italy.", "i know where i will wear this dagger then. cassius from bondage will deliver cassius. therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong. therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat. nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass, nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron can be retentive to the strength of spirit. but life, being weary of these worldly bars, never lacks power to dismiss itself. if i know this, know all the world besides, that part of tyranny that i do bear i can shake off at pleasure.", "so can i. so every bondman in his own hand bears the power to cancel his captivity."], ["and why should caesar be a tyrant then? poor man! i know he would not be a wolf but that he sees the romans are but sheep. he were no lion were not romans hinds. those that with haste will make a mighty fire begin it with weak straws. what trash is rome, what rubbish and what offal, when it serves for the base matter to illuminate so vile a thing as caesar! but, o grief, where hast thou led me? i perhaps speak this before a willing bondman. then i know my answer must be made. but i am armed, and dangers are to me indifferent.", "you speak to casca, and to such a man that is no fleering telltale. hold, my hand. be factious for redress of all these griefs, and i will set this foot of mine as far as who goes farthest.", "there's a bargain made. now know you, casca, i have moved already some certain of the noblest-minded romans to undergo with me an enterprise of honorable-dangerous consequence. and i do know by this they stay for me in pompey's porch. for now, this fearful night, there is no stir or walking in the streets, and the complexion of the element in favor's like the work we have in hand, most bloody, fiery, and most terrible."], ["stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.", "'tis cinna. i do know him by his gait. he is a friend. cinna, where haste you so?", "to find out you. who's that? metellus cimber?", "no, it is casca, one incorporate to our attempts. am i not stayed for, cinna?", "i am glad on 't. what a fearful night is this! there's two or three of us have seen strange sights.", "am i not stayed for? tell me.", "yes, you are. o cassius, if you could but win the noble brutus to our party", "be you content. good cinna, take this paper, and look you lay it in the praetor's chair where brutus may but find it. and throw this in at his window. set this up with wax upon old brutus' statue. all this done, repair to pompey's porch, where you shall find us. is decius brutus and trebonius there?", "all but metellus cimber, and he's gone to seek you at your house. well, i will hie, and so bestow these papers as you bade me.", "that done, repair to pompey's theatre."], ["come, casca, you and i will yet ere day see brutus at his house. three parts of him is ours already, and the man entire upon the next encounter yields him ours.", "oh, he sits high in all the people's hearts, and that which would appear offense in us, his countenance, like richest alchemy, will change to virtue and to worthiness.", "him and his worth and our great need of him you have right well conceited. let us go, for it is after midnight, and ere day we will awake him and be sure of him."], ["what, lucius, ho! i cannot by the progress of the stars give guess how near to day. lucius, i say! i would it were my fault to sleep so soundly. when, lucius, when? awake, i say! what, lucius!", "called you, my lord?", "get me a taper in my study, lucius. when it is lighted, come and call me here.", "i will, my lord.", "it must be by his death, and for my part i know no personal cause to spurn at him but for the general. he would be crowned. how that might change his nature, there's the question. it is the bright day that brings forth the adder and that craves wary walking. crown him that, and then i grant we put a sting in him that at his will he may do danger with."], ["th' abuse of greatness is when it disjoins remorse from power. and, to speak truth of caesar, i have not known when his affections swayed more than his reason. but 'tis a common proof that lowliness is young ambition's ladder, whereto the climber upward turns his face. but when he once attains the upmost round, he then unto the ladder turns his back, looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees by which he did ascend. so caesar may. then, lest he may, prevent. and since the quarrel will bear no color for the thing he is, fashion it thus: that what he is, augmented, would run to these and these extremities. and therefore think him as a serpent's egg which, hatched, would as his kind grow mischievous and kill him in the shell.", "the taper burneth in your closet, sir. searching the window for a flint, i found this paper, thus sealed up, and i am sure it did not lie there when i went to bed.", "get you to bed again. it is not day. is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of march?", "i know not, sir.", "look in the calendar and bring me word.", "i will, sir."], ["the exhalations whizzing in the air give so much light that i may read by them. \"brutus, thou sleep'st. awake, and see thyself. shall rome, etc. speak, strike, redress!\" \"brutus, thou sleep'st. awake.\" such instigations have been often dropped where i have took them up. \"shall rome, etc.\" thus must i piece it out: \"shall rome stand under one man's awe?\" what, rome? my ancestors did from the streets of rome the tarquin drive when he was called a king. \"speak, strike, redress!\" am i entreated to speak and strike? o rome, i make thee promise, if the redress will follow, thou receivest thy full petition at the hand of brutus!", "sir, march is wasted fifteen days.", "'tis good. go to the gate. somebody knocks.", "since cassius first did whet me against caesar, i have not slept."], ["between the acting of a dreadful thing and the first motion, all the interim is like a phantasma or a hideous dream. the genius and the mortal instruments are then in council, and the state of man, like to a little kingdom, suffers then the nature of an insurrection.", "sir, 'tis your brother cassius at the door, who doth desire to see you.", "is he alone?", "no, sir, there are more with him.", "do you know them?", "no, sir. their hats are plucked about their ears, and half their faces buried in their cloaks, that by no means i may discover them by any mark of favor.", "let 'em enter.", "they are the faction. o conspiracy, shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night when evils are most free? o, then by day where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough to mask thy monstrous visage? seek none, conspiracy. hide it in smiles and affability."], ["for if thou path, thy native semblance on, not erebus itself were dim enough to hide thee from prevention.", "i think we are too bold upon your rest. good morrow, brutus. do we trouble you?", "i have been up this hour, awake all night. know i these men that come along with you?", "yes, every man of them, and no man here but honors you, and every one doth wish you had but that opinion of yourself which every noble roman bears of you. this is trebonius.", "he is welcome hither.", "this, decius brutus.", "he is welcome too.", "this, casca. this, cinna. and this, metellus cimber.", "they are all welcome. what watchful cares do interpose themselves betwixt your eyes and night?", "shall i entreat a word?"], ["here lies the east. doth not the day break here?", "no.", "o, pardon, sir, it doth, and yon gray lines that fret the clouds are messengers of day.", "you shall confess that you are both deceived. here, as i point my sword, the sun arises, which is a great way growing on the south, weighing the youthful season of the year. some two months hence up higher toward the north he first presents his fire, and the high east stands, as the capitol, directly here.", "cassius give me your hands all over, one by one.", "and let us swear our resolution.", "no, not an oath. if not the face of men, the sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse if these be motives weak, break off betimes, and every man hence to his idle bed. so let high-sighted tyranny range on till each man drop by lottery. but if these as i am sure they do bear fire enough to kindle cowards and to steel with valor the melting spirits of women, then, countrymen, what need we any spur but our own cause to prick us to redress? what other bond than secret romans that have spoke the word and will not palter? and what other oath than honesty to honesty engaged, that this shall be, or we will fall for it? swear priests and cowards and men cautelous, old feeble carrions and such suffering souls that welcome wrongs. unto bad causes swear such creatures as men doubt. but do not stain the even virtue of our enterprise, nor th' insuppressive mettle of our spirits, to think that or our cause or our performance did need an oath, when every drop of blood that every roman bears and nobly bears is guilty of a several bastardy if he do break the smallest particle of any promise that hath passed from him."], ["but what of cicero? shall we sound him? i think he will stand very strong with us.", "let us not leave him out.", "no, by no means.", "o, let us have him, for his silver hairs will purchase us a good opinion and buy men's voices to commend our deeds. it shall be said his judgment ruled our hands. our youths and wildness shall no whit appear, but all be buried in his gravity.", "o, name him not. let us not break with him, for he will never follow anything that other men begin.", "then leave him out."], ["indeed he is not fit.", "shall no man else be touched but only caesar?", "decius, well urged. i think it is not meet mark antony, so well beloved of caesar, should outlive caesar. we shall find of him a shrewd contriver. and, you know, his means, if he improve them, may well stretch so far as to annoy us all; which to prevent, let antony and caesar fall together.", "our course will seem too bloody, caius cassius, to cut the head off and then hack the limbs, like wrath in death and envy afterwards, for antony is but a limb of caesar. let us be sacrificers but not butchers, caius. we all stand up against the spirit of caesar, and in the spirit of men there is no blood. oh, that we then could come by caesar's spirit and not dismember caesar! but, alas, caesar must bleed for it. and, gentle friends, let's kill him boldly but not wrathfully. let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods, not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds. and let our hearts, as subtle masters do, stir up their servants to an act of rage and after seem to chide 'em. this shall make our purpose necessary and not envious, which so appearing to the common eyes, we shall be called purgers, not murderers. and for mark antony, think not of him, for he can do no more than caesar's arm when caesar's head is off."], ["yet i fear him. for in the engrafted love he bears to caesar", "alas, good cassius, do not think of him. if he love caesar, all that he can do is to himself: take thought and die for caesar. and that were much he should, for he is given to sports, to wildness and much company.", "there is no fear in him. let him not die, for he will live and laugh at this hereafter.", "peace! count the clock.", "the clock hath stricken three.", "'tis time to part.", "but it is doubtful yet whether caesar will come forth today or no. for he is superstitious grown of late, quite from the main opinion he held once of fantasy, of dreams and ceremonies. it may be, these apparent prodigies, the unaccustomed terror of this night, and the persuasion of his augurers may hold him from the capitol today.", "never fear that. if he be so resolved, i can o'ersway him. for he loves to hear that unicorns may be betrayed with trees, and bears with glasses, elephants with holes, lions with toils, and men with flatterers. but when i tell him he hates flatterers, he says he does, being then most flatterd. let me work. for i can give his humor the true bent, and i will bring him to the capitol."], ["nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.", "by the eighth hour. is that the uttermost?", "be that the uttermost, and fail not then.", "caius ligarius doth bear caesar hard, who rated him for speaking well of pompey. i wonder none of you have thought of him.", "now, good metellus, go along by him. he loves me well, and i have given him reasons. send him but hither and i'll fashion him.", "the morning comes upon 's. we'll leave you, brutus. and, friends, disperse yourselves. but all remember what you have said, and show yourselves true romans.", "good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily. let not our looks put on our purposes, but bear it as our roman actors do, with untired spirits and formal constancy. and so good morrow to you every one."], ["boy! lucius! fast asleep? it is no matter. enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber. thou hast no figures nor no fantasies, which busy care draws in the brains of men. therefore thou sleep'st so sound.", "brutus, my lord.", "portia, what mean you? wherefore rise you now? it is not for your health thus to commit your weak condition to the raw, cold morning.", "nor for yours neither. y' have ungently, brutus, stole from my bed. and yesternight, at supper, you suddenly arose and walked about, musing and sighing, with your arms across, and when i asked you what the matter was, you stared upon me with ungentle looks. i urged you further, then you scratched your head and too impatiently stamped with your foot. yet i insisted; yet you answered not, but with an angry wafture of your hand gave sign for me to leave you. so i did, fearing to strengthen that impatience which seemed too much enkindled, and withal hoping it was but an effect of humor, which sometime hath his hour with every man. it will not let you eat nor talk nor sleep, and could it work so much upon your shape as it hath much prevailed on your condition, i should not know you, brutus. dear my lord, make me acquainted with your cause of grief."], ["i am not well in health, and that is all.", "brutus is wise, and were he not in health, he would embrace the means to come by it.", "why, so i do. good portia, go to bed.", "is brutus sick? and is it physical to walk unbracd and suck up the humors of the dank morning? what, is brutus sick, and will he steal out of his wholesome bed, to dare the vile contagion of the night and tempt the rheumy and unpurgd air to add unto his sickness? no, my brutus. you have some sick offense within your mind, which by the right and virtue of my place i ought to know of. and upon my knees i charm you, by my once-commended beauty, by all your vows of love and that great vow which did incorporate and make us one that you unfold to me, your self, your half, why you are heavy, and what men tonight have had to resort to you. for here have been some six or seven who did hide their faces even from darkness.", "kneel not, gentle portia.", "i should not need if you were gentle, brutus. within the bond of marriage, tell me, brutus, is it excepted i should know no secrets that appertain to you? am i yourself but, as it were, in sort or limitation, to keep with you at meals, comfort your bed, and talk to you sometimes?"], ["dwell i but in the suburbs of your good pleasure? if it be no more, portia is brutus' harlot, not his wife.", "you are my true and honorable wife, as dear to me as are the ruddy drops that visit my sad heart.", "if this were true, then should i know this secret. i grant i am a woman, but withal a woman that lord brutus took to wife. i grant i am a woman, but withal a woman well-reputed, cato's daughter. think you i am no stronger than my sex, being so fathered and so husbanded? tell me your counsels. i will not disclose 'em. i have made strong proof of my constancy, giving myself a voluntary wound here in the thigh. can i bear that with patience, and not my husband's secrets?", "o ye gods, render me worthy of this noble wife!", "hark, hark! one knocks. portia, go in awhile. and by and by thy bosom shall partake the secrets of my heart. all my engagements i will construe to thee, all the charactery of my sad brows. leave me with haste.", "lucius, who's that knocking?"], ["he is a sick man that would speak with you.", "caius ligarius, that metellus spake of. boy, stand aside. caius ligarius, how?", "vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.", "o, what a time have you chose out, brave caius, to wear a kerchief! would you were not sick!", "i am not sick if brutus have in hand any exploit worthy the name of honor.", "such an exploit have i in hand, ligarius, had you a healthful ear to hear of it.", "by all the gods that romans bow before, i here discard my sickness! soul of rome, brave son derived from honorable loins, thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up my mortifid spirit. now bid me run, and i will strive with things impossible, yea, get the better of them. what's to do?", "a piece of work that will make sick men whole.", "but are not some whole that we must make sick?", "that must we also. what it is, my caius, i shall unfold to thee as we are going to whom it must be done."], ["set on your foot, and with a heart new-fired i follow you, to do i know not what. but it sufficeth that brutus leads me on.", "follow me, then."], ["nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight. thrice hath calphurnia in her sleep cried out, \"help, ho! they murder caesar!\" who's within?", "my lord.", "go bid the priests do present sacrifice and bring me their opinions of success.", "i will, my lord.", "what mean you, caesar? think you to walk forth? you shall not stir out of your house today.", "caesar shall forth. the things that threatened me ne'er looked but on my back. when they shall see the face of caesar, they are vanishd.", "caesar, i never stood on ceremonies, yet now they fright me. there is one within, besides the things that we have heard and seen, recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch. a lioness hath whelpd in the streets, and graves have yawned and yielded up their dead."], ["fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds in ranks and squadrons and right form of war, which drizzled blood upon the capitol. the noise of battle hurtled in the air. horses did neigh, and dying men did groan, and ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets. o caesar! these things are beyond all use, and i do fear them.", "what can be avoided whose end is purposed by the mighty gods? yet caesar shall go forth, for these predictions are to the world in general as to caesar.", "when beggars die there are no comets seen. the heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.", "cowards die many times before their deaths. the valiant never taste of death but once. of all the wonders that i yet have heard, it seems to me most strange that men should fear, seeing that death, a necessary end, will come when it will come.", "what say the augurers?", "they would not have you to stir forth today. plucking the entrails of an offering forth, they could not find a heart within the beast.", "the gods do this in shame of cowardice. caesar should be a beast without a heart if he should stay at home today for fear. no, caesar shall not. danger knows full well"], ["that caesar is more dangerous than he. we are two lions littered in one day, and i the elder and more terrible. and caesar shall go forth.", "alas, my lord, your wisdom is consumed in confidence. do not go forth today. call it my fear that keeps you in the house, and not your own. we'll send mark antony to the senate house, and he shall say you are not well today. let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.", "mark antony shall say i am not well, and for thy humor i will stay at home.", "here's decius brutus. he shall tell them so.", "caesar, all hail! good morrow, worthy caesar. i come to fetch you to the senate house.", "and you are come in very happy time to bear my greeting to the senators and tell them that i will not come today. \"cannot\" is false, and that i dare not, falser. i will not come today. tell them so, decius.", "say he is sick.", "shall caesar send a lie? have i in conquest stretched mine arm so far to be afraid to tell graybeards the truth?"], ["decius, go tell them caesar will not come.", "most mighty caesar, let me know some cause, lest i be laughed at when i tell them so.", "the cause is in my will. i will not come. that is enough to satisfy the senate. but for your private satisfaction, because i love you, i will let you know. calphurnia here, my wife, stays me at home. she dreamt tonight she saw my statue, which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts, did run pure blood. and many lusty romans came smiling and did bathe their hands in it. and these does she apply for warnings and portents and evils imminent, and on her knee hath begged that i will stay at home today.", "this dream is all amiss interpreted. it was a vision fair and fortunate. your statue spouting blood in many pipes, in which so many smiling romans bathed, signifies that from you great rome shall suck reviving blood, and that great men shall press for tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance. this by calphurnia's dream is signified.", "and this way have you well expounded it.", "i have, when you have heard what i can say. and know it now: the senate have concluded to give this day a crown to mighty caesar."], ["if you shall send them word you will not come, their minds may change. besides, it were a mock apt to be rendered for someone to say, \"break up the senate till another time when caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams.\" if caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper, \"lo, caesar is afraid\"? pardon me, caesar. for my dear, dear love to your proceeding bids me tell you this, and reason to my love is liable.", "how foolish do your fears seem now, calphurnia! i am ashamd i did yield to them. give me my robe, for i will go.", "and look, where publius is come to fetch me.", "good morrow, caesar.", "welcome, publius. what, brutus, are you stirred so early too? good morrow, casca. caius ligarius, caesar was ne'er so much your enemy as that same ague which hath made you lean. what is 't o'clock?", "caesar, 'tis strucken eight.", "i thank you for your pains and courtesy."], ["see, antony, that revels long a-nights, is notwithstanding up. good morrow, antony.", "so to most noble caesar.", "bid them prepare within. i am to blame to be thus waited for. now, cinna. now, metellus. what, trebonius, i have an hour's talk in store for you. remember that you call on me today. be near me, that i may remember you.", "caesar, i will. and so near will i be that your best friends shall wish i had been further.", "good friends, go in and taste some wine with me. and we, like friends, will straightway go together.", "that every \"like\" is not the same, o caesar, the heart of brutus earns to think upon."], ["\"caesar, beware of brutus. take heed of cassius. come not near casca. have an eye to cinna. trust not trebonius. mark well metellus cimber. decius brutus loves thee not. thou hast wronged caius ligarius. there is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent against caesar. if thou beest not immortal, look about you. security gives way to conspiracy. the mighty gods defend thee! thy lover, artemidorus\" here will i stand till caesar pass along, and as a suitor will i give him this. my heart laments that virtue cannot live out of the teeth of emulation. if thou read this, o caesar, thou mayst live. if not, the fates with traitors do contrive."], ["i prithee, boy, run to the senate house. stay not to answer me, but get thee gone. why dost thou stay?", "to know my errand, madam.", "i would have had thee there and here again ere i can tell thee what thou shouldst do there. o constancy, be strong upon my side, set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue! i have a man's mind but a woman's might. how hard it is for women to keep counsel! art thou here yet?", "madam, what should i do? run to the capitol, and nothing else? and so return to you, and nothing else?", "yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well, for he went sickly forth. and take good note what caesar doth, what suitors press to him. hark, boy! what noise is that?", "i hear none, madam.", "prithee, listen well. i heard a bustling rumor like a fray, and the wind brings it from the capitol.", "sooth, madam, i hear nothing."], ["come hither, fellow. which way hast thou been?", "at mine own house, good lady.", "what is 't o'clock?", "about the ninth hour, lady.", "is caesar yet gone to the capitol?", "madam, not yet. i go to take my stand to see him pass on to the capitol.", "thou hast some suit to caesar, hast thou not?", "that i have, lady. if it will please caesar to be so good to caesar as to hear me, i shall beseech him to befriend himself.", "why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him?", "none that i know will be; much that i fear may chance. good morrow to you. here the street is narrow. the throng that follows caesar at the heels, of senators, of praetors, common suitors, will crowd a feeble man almost to death. i'll get me to a place more void, and there speak to great caesar as he comes along."], ["i must go in. ay me, how weak a thing the heart of woman is! o brutus, the heavens speed thee in thine enterprise! sure, the boy heard me. lucius brutus hath a suit that caesar will not grant. oh, i grow faint. run, lucius, and commend me to my lord. say i am merry. come to me again, and bring me word what he doth say to thee."], ["soothsayer the ides of march are come.", "ay, caesar, but not gone.", "hail, caesar! read this schedule.", "caesar trebonius doth desire you to o'er-read, at your best leisure, this his humble suit.", "o caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit that touches caesar nearer. read it, great caesar.", "what touches us ourself shall be last served.", "delay not, caesar. read it instantly.", "what, is the fellow mad?", "artemidorus sirrah, give place.", "artemidorus what, urge you your petitions in the street? come to the capitol."], ["cassius i wish your enterprise today may thrive.", "what enterprise, popillius?", "fare you well.", "cassius what said popillius lena?", "brutus he wished today our enterprise might thrive. i fear our purpose is discoverd.", "look how he makes to caesar. mark him.", "casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention brutus, what shall be done? if this be known, cassius or caesar never shall turn back, for i will slay myself.", "cassius, be constant. popillius lena speaks not of our purposes. for, look, he smiles, and caesar doth not change.", "trebonius knows his time. for, look you, brutus. he draws mark antony out of the way.", "where is metellus cimber? let him go and presently prefer his suit to caesar."], ["he is addressed. press near and second him.", "casca, you are the first that rears your hand.", "are we all ready? what is now amiss that caesar and his senate must redress?", "most high, most mighty, and most puissant caesar, metellus cimber throws before thy seat an humble heart", "i must prevent thee, cimber. these couchings and these lowly courtesies might fire the blood of ordinary men and turn preordinance and first decree into the law of children. be not fond, to think that caesar bears such rebel blood that will be thawed from the true quality with that which melteth fools i mean, sweet words, low-crookd curtsies, and base spaniel fawning. thy brother by decree is banishd. if thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him, i spurn thee like a cur out of my way. know, caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause will he be satisfied.", "is there no voice more worthy than my own to sound more sweetly in great caesar's ear for the repealing of my banished brother?", "i kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, caesar, desiring thee that publius cimber may have an immediate freedom of repeal."], ["what, brutus?", "pardon, caesar. caesar, pardon. as low as to thy foot doth cassius fall to beg enfranchisement for publius cimber.", "i could be well moved if i were as you. if i could pray to move, prayers would move me. but i am constant as the northern star, of whose true-fixed and resting quality there is no fellow in the firmament. the skies are painted with unnumbered sparks. they are all fire and every one doth shine, but there's but one in all doth hold his place. so in the world. 'tis furnished well with men, and men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive, yet in the number i do know but one that unassailable holds on his rank, unshaked of motion. and that i am he let me a little show it even in this: that i was constant cimber should be banished, and constant do remain to keep him so.", "o caesar", "hence! wilt thou lift up olympus?", "great caesar", "doth not brutus bootless kneel?", "speak, hands, for me!"], ["then fall, caesar.", "liberty! freedom! tyranny is dead! run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.", "some to the common pulpits, and cry out, \"liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!\"", "people and senators, be not affrighted. fly not. stand still. ambition's debt is paid.", "go to the pulpit, brutus.", "and cassius too.", "where's publius?", "here, quite confounded with this mutiny.", "stand fast together, lest some friend of caesar's should chance", "talk not of standing. publius, good cheer. there is no harm intended to your person, nor to no roman else. so tell them, publius."], ["and leave us, publius, lest that the people, rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.", "do so. and let no man abide this deed but we the doers.", "where is antony?", "fled to his house amazed. men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run as it were doomsday.", "fates, we will know your pleasures. that we shall die, we know. 'tis but the time, and drawing days out, that men stand upon.", "why, he that cuts off twenty years of life cuts off so many years of fearing death.", "grant that, and then is death a benefit. so are we caesar's friends, that have abridged his time of fearing death. stoop, romans, stoop, and let us bathe our hands in caesar's blood up to the elbows, and besmear our swords. then walk we forth, even to the marketplace, and waving our red weapons o'er our heads let's all cry, \"peace, freedom, and liberty!\"", "stoop, then, and wash."], ["how many ages hence shall this our lofty scene be acted over in states unborn and accents yet unknown!", "how many times shall caesar bleed in sport, that now on pompey's basis lies along no worthier than the dust!", "so oft as that shall be, so often shall the knot of us be called \"the men that gave their country liberty.\"", "what, shall we forth?", "ay, every man away. brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels with the most boldest and best hearts of rome.", "soft! who comes here? a friend of antony's.", "thus, brutus, did my master bid me kneel. thus did mark antony bid me fall down, and, being prostrate, thus he bade me say: brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest. caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving. say i love brutus, and i honor him. say i feared caesar, honored him, and loved him."], ["if brutus will vouchsafe that antony may safely come to him and be resolved how caesar hath deserved to lie in death, mark antony shall not love caesar dead so well as brutus living, but will follow the fortunes and affairs of noble brutus thorough the hazards of this untrod state with all true faith. so says my master antony.", "thy master is a wise and valiant roman. i never thought him worse. tell him, so please him come unto this place, he shall be satisfied and, by my honor, depart untouched.", "i'll fetch him presently.", "i know that we shall have him well to friend.", "i wish we may. but yet have i a mind that fears him much, and my misgiving still falls shrewdly to the purpose.", "but here comes antony. welcome, mark antony.", "o mighty caesar! dost thou lie so low? are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils, shrunk to this little measure? fare thee well. i know not, gentlemen, what you intend, who else must be let blood, who else is rank."], ["if i myself, there is no hour so fit as caesar's death's hour, nor no instrument of half that worth as those your swords, made rich with the most noble blood of all this world. i do beseech ye, if you bear me hard, now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke, fulfill your pleasure. live a thousand years, i shall not find myself so apt to die. no place will please me so, no mean of death, as here by caesar, and by you cut off, the choice and master spirits of this age.", "o antony, beg not your death of us. though now we must appear bloody and cruel as by our hands and this our present act you see we do yet see you but our hands and this the bleeding business they have done. our hearts you see not. they are pitiful. and pity to the general wrong of rome as fire drives out fire, so pity pity hath done this deed on caesar. for your part, to you our swords have leaden points, mark antony. our arms in strength of malice and our hearts of brothers' temper do receive you in with all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.", "your voice shall be as strong as any man's in the disposing of new dignities.", "only be patient till we have appeased the multitude, beside themselves with fear, and then we will deliver you the cause, why i, that did love caesar when i struck him, have thus proceeded."], ["i doubt not of your wisdom. let each man render me his bloody hand. first, marcus brutus, will i shake with you. next, caius cassius, do i take your hand. now, decius brutus, yours. now yours, metellus. yours, cinna. and, my valiant casca, yours. though last, not last in love, yours, good trebonius. gentlemen all, alas, what shall i say? my credit now stands on such slippery ground that one of two bad ways you must conceit me, either a coward or a flatterer that i did love thee, caesar, o, 'tis true. if then thy spirit look upon us now, shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death to see thy antony making his peace, shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes most noble! in the presence of thy corse? had i as many eyes as thou hast wounds, weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood, it would become me better than to close in terms of friendship with thine enemies. pardon me, julius! here wast thou bayed, brave hart; here didst thou fall; and here thy hunters stand, signed in thy spoil, and crimsoned in thy lethe. o world, thou wast the forest to this hart, and this indeed, o world, the heart of thee. how like a deer, strucken by many princes, dost thou here lie!", "mark antony", "pardon me, caius cassius. the enemies of caesar shall say this; then, in a friend, it is cold modesty."], ["i blame you not for praising caesar so. but what compact mean you to have with us? will you be pricked in number of our friends? or shall we on, and not depend on you?", "therefore i took your hands, but was indeed swayed from the point by looking down on caesar. friends am i with you all and love you all upon this hope: that you shall give me reasons why and wherein caesar was dangerous.", "or else were this a savage spectacle! our reasons are so full of good regard that were you, antony, the son of caesar, you should be satisfied.", "that's all i seek. and am moreover suitor that i may produce his body to the marketplace, and in the pulpit, as becomes a friend, speak in the order of his funeral.", "you shall, mark antony.", "brutus, a word with you. brutus you know not what you do. do not consent that antony speak in his funeral. know you how much the people may be moved by that which he will utter?", "cassius by your pardon. i will myself into the pulpit first, and show the reason of our caesar's death."], ["what antony shall speak, i will protest, he speaks by leave and by permission, and that we are contented caesar shall have all true rites and lawful ceremonies. it shall advantage more than do us wrong.", "brutus i know not what may fall. i like it not.", "mark antony, here, take you caesar's body. you shall not in your funeral speech blame us, but speak all good you can devise of caesar, and say you do 't by our permission. else shall you not have any hand at all about his funeral. and you shall speak in the same pulpit whereto i am going, after my speech is ended.", "be it so. i do desire no more.", "prepare the body then, and follow us.", "o, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth, that i am meek and gentle with these butchers! thou art the ruins of the noblest man that ever livd in the tide of times. woe to the hand that shed this costly blood! over thy wounds now do i prophesy which, like dumb mouths, do ope their ruby lips to beg the voice and utterance of my tongue a curse shall light upon the limbs of men."], ["domestic fury and fierce civil strife shall cumber all the parts of italy. blood and destruction shall be so in use, and dreadful objects so familiar, that mothers shall but smile when they behold their infants quartered with the hands of war, all pity choked with custom of fell deeds, and caesar's spirit, ranging for revenge, with ate by his side come hot from hell, shall in these confines with a monarch's voice cry \"havoc!\" and let slip the dogs of war, that this foul deed shall smell above the earth with carrion men, groaning for burial.", "you serve octavius caesar, do you not?", "i do, mark antony.", "caesar did write for him to come to rome.", "he did receive his letters and is coming. and bid me say to you by word of mouth caesar o caesar!", "thy heart is big. get thee apart and weep. passion, i see, is catching, for mine eyes, seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine, began to water. is thy master coming?", "he lies tonight within seven leagues of rome."], ["post back with speed, and tell him what hath chanced. here is a mourning rome, a dangerous rome, no rome of safety for octavius yet. hie hence, and tell him so. yet, stay awhile. thou shalt not back till i have borne this corse into the marketplace. there shall i try, in my oration, how the people take the crul issue of these bloody men. according to the which, thou shalt discourse to young octavius of the state of things. lend me your hand."], ["we will be satisfied! let us be satisfied!", "then follow me and give me audience, friends. cassius, go you into the other street and part the numbers. those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here. those that will follow cassius, go with him, and public reasons shall be renderd of caesar's death.", "i will hear brutus speak.", "i will hear cassius and compare their reasons when severally we hear them renderd.", "the noble brutus is ascended. silence!", "be patient till the last. romans, countrymen, and lovers! hear me for my cause, and be silent that you may hear. believe me for mine honor, and have respect to mine honor that you may believe. censure me in your wisdom, and awake your senses that you may the better judge. if there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of caesar's, to him i say that brutus' love to caesar was no less than his. if then that friend demand why brutus rose against caesar, this is my answer: not that i loved caesar less, but that i loved rome more."], ["had you rather caesar were living and die all slaves, than that caesar were dead, to live all free men? as caesar loved me, i weep for him. as he was fortunate, i rejoice at it. as he was valiant, i honor him. but, as he was ambitious, i slew him. there is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor, and death for his ambition. who is here so base that would be a bondman? if any, speak for him have i offended. who is here so rude that would not be a roman? if any, speak for him have i offended. who is here so vile that will not love his country? if any, speak for him have i offended. i pause for a reply.", "none, brutus, none.", "then none have i offended. i have done no more to caesar than you shall do to brutus. the question of his death is enrolled in the capitol. his glory not extenuated wherein he was worthy, nor his offenses enforced for which he suffered death.", "here comes his body, mourned by mark antony, who, though he had no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying a place in the commonwealth as which of you shall not? with this i depart: that, as i slew my best lover for the good of rome, i have the same dagger for myself when it shall please my country to need my death.", "live, brutus! live, live!", "bring him with triumph home unto his house!"], ["give him a statue with his ancestors!", "let him be caesar!", "caesar's better parts shall be crowned in brutus!", "we'll bring him to his house with shouts and clamors.", "my countrymen", "peace, silence! brutus speaks.", "peace, ho!", "good countrymen, let me depart alone. and, for my sake, stay here with antony. do grace to caesar's corpse, and grace his speech tending to caesar's glories, which mark antony by our permission is allowed to make. i do entreat you, not a man depart, save i alone, till antony have spoke.", "stay, ho! and let us hear mark antony.", "let him go up into the public chair. we'll hear him. noble antony, go up.", "for brutus' sake, i am beholding to you."], ["what does he say of brutus?", "he says for brutus' sake he finds himself beholding to us all.", "'twere best he speak no harm of brutus here.", "this caesar was a tyrant.", "nay, that's certain. we are blest that rome is rid of him.", "peace! let us hear what antony can say.", "you gentle romans", "peace, ho! let us hear him.", "friends, romans, countrymen, lend me your ears. i come to bury caesar, not to praise him. the evil that men do lives after them; the good is oft interrd with their bones. so let it be with caesar. the noble brutus hath told you caesar was ambitious. if it were so, it was a grievous fault, and grievously hath caesar answered it. here, under leave of brutus and the rest for brutus is an honorable man; so are they all, all honorable men come i to speak in caesar's funeral. he was my friend, faithful and just to me. but brutus says he was ambitious, and brutus is an honorable man. he hath brought many captives home to rome whose ransoms did the general coffers fill."], ["did this in caesar seem ambitious? when that the poor have cried, caesar hath wept. ambition should be made of sterner stuff. yet brutus says he was ambitious, and brutus is an honorable man. you all did see that on the lupercal i thrice presented him a kingly crown, which he did thrice refuse. was this ambition? yet brutus says he was ambitious, and, sure, he is an honorable man. i speak not to disprove what brutus spoke, but here i am to speak what i do know. you all did love him once, not without cause. what cause withholds you then to mourn for him? o judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts, and men have lost their reason. bear with me. my heart is in the coffin there with caesar, and i must pause till it come back to me.", "methinks there is much reason in his sayings.", "if thou consider rightly of the matter, caesar has had great wrong.", "has he, masters? i fear there will a worse come in his place.", "marked ye his words? he would not take the crown. therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.", "if it be found so, some will dear abide it.", "poor soul! his eyes are red as fire with weeping.", "there's not a nobler man in rome than antony."], ["now mark him. he begins again to speak.", "but yesterday the word of caesar might have stood against the world. now lies he there, and none so poor to do him reverence. o masters, if i were disposed to stir your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage, i should do brutus wrong, and cassius wrong who, you all know, are honorable men. i will not do them wrong. i rather choose to wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you, than i will wrong such honorable men. but here's a parchment with the seal of caesar. i found it in his closet. 'tis his will. let but the commons hear this testament which, pardon me, i do not mean to read and they would go and kiss dead caesar's wounds and dip their napkins in his sacred blood, yea, beg a hair of him for memory, and, dying, mention it within their wills, bequeathing it as a rich legacy unto their issue.", "we'll hear the will. read it, mark antony!", "the will, the will! we will hear caesar's will.", "have patience, gentle friends. i must not read it. it is not meet you know how caesar loved you. you are not wood, you are not stones, but men. and, being men, bearing the will of caesar, it will inflame you, it will make you mad. 'tis good you know not that you are his heirs. for, if you should oh, what would come of it!"], ["read the will. we'll hear it, antony. you shall read us the will, caesar's will.", "will you be patient? will you stay awhile? i have o'ershot myself to tell you of it. i fear i wrong the honorable men whose daggers have stabbed caesar. i do fear it.", "they were traitors! \"honorable men\"!", "the will! the testament!", "they were villains, murderers. the will! read the will!", "you will compel me, then, to read the will? then make a ring about the corpse of caesar, and let me show you him that made the will. shall i descend? and will you give me leave?", "come down.", "descend.", "you shall have leave.", "a ring! stand round.", "stand from the hearse. stand from the body.", "room for antony, most noble antony!"], ["nay, press not so upon me. stand far off.", "stand back. room! bear back.", "if you have tears, prepare to shed them now. you all do know this mantle. i remember the first time ever caesar put it on. 'twas on a summer's evening in his tent, that day he overcame the nervii. look, in this place ran cassius' dagger through. see what a rent the envious casca made. through this the well-belovd brutus stabbed. and as he plucked his cursd steel away, mark how the blood of caesar followed it, as rushing out of doors, to be resolved if brutus so unkindly knocked, or no. for brutus, as you know, was caesar's angel. judge, o you gods, how dearly caesar loved him! this was the most unkindest cut of all. for when the noble caesar saw him stab, ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms, quite vanquished him. then burst his mighty heart, and, in his mantle muffling up his face, even at the base of pompey's statue, which all the while ran blood, great caesar fell. o, what a fall was there, my countrymen! then i, and you, and all of us fell down, whilst bloody treason flourished over us. oh, now you weep, and, i perceive, you feel the dint of pity. these are gracious drops. kind souls, what, weep you when you but behold our caesar's vesture wounded? look you here, here is himself, marred, as you see, with traitors. caesar'"], ["o piteous spectacle!", "o noble caesar!", "o woeful day!", "o traitors, villains!", "o most bloody sight!", "we will be revenged.", "revenge! about! seek! burn! fire! kill! slay! let not a traitor live!", "stay, countrymen.", "peace there! hear the noble antony.", "we'll hear him. we'll follow him. we'll die with him.", "good friends, sweet friends! let me not stir you up to such a sudden flood of mutiny. they that have done this deed are honorable. what private griefs they have, alas, i know not, that made them do it. they are wise and honorable, and will, no doubt, with reasons answer you. i come not, friends, to steal away your hearts. i am no orator, as brutus is, but, as you know me all, a plain blunt man that love my friend. and that they know full well that gave me public leave to speak of him. for i have neither wit nor words nor worth, action nor utterance nor the power of speech, to stir men's blood. i only speak right on. i tell you that which you yourselves do know, show you sweet caesar's wounds, poor poor dumb mouths, and bid them speak for me. but were i brutus, and brutus antony, there were an antony would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue in every wound of caesar that should move the stones of rome to rise and mutiny."], ["we'll mutiny.", "we'll burn the house of brutus.", "away, then! come, seek the conspirators.", "yet hear me, countrymen. yet hear me speak.", "peace, ho! hear antony. most noble antony!", "why, friends, you go to do you know not what. wherein hath caesar thus deserved your loves? alas, you know not. i must tell you then. you have forgot the will i told you of.", "most true. the will! let's stay and hear the will.", "here is the will, and under caesar's seal to every roman citizen he gives to every several man seventy-five drachmas.", "most noble caesar! we'll revenge his death.", "o royal caesar!", "hear me with patience."], ["peace, ho!", "moreover, he hath left you all his walks, his private arbors and new-planted orchards, on this side tiber. he hath left them you and to your heirs forever common pleasures, to walk abroad and recreate yourselves. here was a caesar! when comes such another?", "never, never. come, away, away! we'll burn his body in the holy place, and with the brands fire the traitors' houses. take up the body.", "go fetch fire.", "pluck down benches.", "pluck down forms, windows, anything.", "now let it work. mischief, thou art afoot. take thou what course thou wilt!", "how now, fellow?", "sir, octavius is already come to rome.", "where is he?", "he and lepidus are at caesar's house."], ["and thither will i straight to visit him. he comes upon a wish. fortune is merry, and in this mood will give us anything.", "i heard him say, brutus and cassius are rid like madmen through the gates of rome.", "belike they had some notice of the people how i had moved them. bring me to octavius."], ["i dreamt tonight that i did feast with caesar, and things unlucky charge my fantasy. i have no will to wander forth of doors, yet something leads me forth.", "what is your name?", "whither are you going?", "where do you dwell?", "are you a married man or a bachelor?", "answer every man directly.", "ay, and briefly.", "ay, and wisely.", "ay, and truly, you were best.", "what is my name? whither am i going? where do i dwell? am i a married man or a bachelor? then, to answer every man directly and briefly, wisely and truly wisely i say, i am a bachelor.", "that's as much as to say they are fools that marry. you'll bear me a bang for that, i fear. proceed, directly.", "directly, i am going to caesar's funeral."], ["as a friend or an enemy?", "as a friend.", "that matter is answered directly.", "for your dwelling briefly.", "briefly, i dwell by the capitol.", "your name, sir, truly.", "truly, my name is cinna.", "tear him to pieces. he's a conspirator.", "i am cinna the poet. i am cinna the poet.", "tear him for his bad verses! tear him for his bad verses!", "i am not cinna the conspirator.", "it is no matter. his name's cinna. pluck but his name out of his heart and turn him going.", "tear him, tear him!", "come, brands, ho, firebrands. to brutus', to cassius', burn all. some to decius' house and some to casca's. some to ligarius'. away, go!"], ["these many, then, shall die. their names are pricked.", "lepidus your brother too must die. consent you, lepidus?", "i do consent", "prick him down, antony.", "upon condition publius shall not live, who is your sister's son, mark antony.", "he shall not live. look, with a spot i damn him. but, lepidus, go you to caesar's house. fetch the will hither, and we shall determine how to cut off some charge in legacies.", "what, shall i find you here?", "or here, or at the capitol.", "this is a slight, unmeritable man, meet to be sent on errands. is it fit, the threefold world divided, he should stand one of the three to share it?"], ["so you thought him. and took his voice who should be pricked to die in our black sentence and proscription.", "octavius, i have seen more days than you. and though we lay these honors on this man to ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads, he shall but bear them as the ass bears gold, to groan and sweat under the business, either led or driven, as we point the way. and having brought our treasure where we will, then take we down his load and turn him off, like to the empty ass, to shake his ears and graze in commons.", "you may do your will, but he's a tried and valiant soldier.", "so is my horse, octavius, and for that i do appoint him store of provender. it is a creature that i teach to fight, to wind, to stop, to run directly on, his corporal motion governed by my spirit, and, in some taste, is lepidus but so. he must be taught and trained and bid go forth, a barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds on objects, arts, and imitations, which, out of use and staled by other men, begin his fashion. do not talk of him but as a property. and now, octavius, listen great things. brutus and cassius are levying powers. we must straight make head. therefore let our alliance be combined, our best friends made, our means stretched."], ["and let us presently go sit in council how covert matters may be best disclosed, and open perils surest answered.", "let us do so. for we are at the stake and bayed about with many enemies. and some that smile have in their hearts, i fear, millions of mischiefs."], ["stand, ho!", "give the word, ho, and stand.", "what now, lucillius? is cassius near?", "he is at hand, and pindarus is come to do you salutation from his master.", "he greets me well. your master, pindarus, in his own change or by ill officers hath given me some worthy cause to wish things done, undone. but if he be at hand i shall be satisfied.", "i do not doubt but that my noble master will appear such as he is, full of regard and honor.", "he is not doubted. a word, lucillius. lucillius how he received you, let me be resolved.", "with courtesy and with respect enough. but not with such familiar instances nor with such free and friendly conference as he hath used of old.", "thou hast described a hot friend cooling. ever note, lucillius, when love begins to sicken and decay, it useth an enforcd ceremony. there are no tricks in plain and simple faith. but hollow men, like horses hot at hand, make gallant show and promise of their mettle."], ["but when they should endure the bloody spur, they fall their crests and, like deceitful jades, sink in the trial. comes his army on?", "they mean this night in sardis to be quartered. the greater part, the horse in general, are come with cassius.", "hark! he is arrived. march gently on to meet him.", "stand, ho!", "stand, ho! speak the word along.", "stand!", "stand!", "stand!", "most noble brother, you have done me wrong.", "judge me, you gods! wrong i mine enemies? and if not so, how should i wrong a brother?"], ["brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs. and when you do them", "cassius, be content. speak your griefs softly. i do know you well. before the eyes of both our armies here, which should perceive nothing but love from us, let us not wrangle. bid them move away. then in my tent, cassius, enlarge your griefs, and i will give you audience.", "pindarus, bid our commanders lead their charges off a little from this ground.", "lucillius, do you the like. and let no man come to our tent till we have done our conference. let lucius and titinius guard our door."], ["that you have wronged me doth appear in this: you have condemned and noted lucius pella for taking bribes here of the sardians, wherein my letters, praying on his side because i knew the man, were slighted off.", "you wronged yourself to write in such a case.", "in such a time as this it is not meet that every nice offense should bear his comment.", "let me tell you, cassius, you yourself are much condemned to have an itching palm, to sell and mart your offices for gold to undeservers.", "i \"an itching palm\"! you know that you are brutus that speak this, or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.", "the name of cassius honors this corruption, and chastisement doth therefore hide his head.", "chastisement!", "remember march, the ides of march remember. did not great julius bleed for justice' sake?"], ["what villain touched his body, that did stab, and not for justice? what, shall one of us that struck the foremost man of all this world but for supporting robbers, shall we now contaminate our fingers with base bribes, and sell the mighty space of our large honors for so much trash as may be graspd thus? i had rather be a dog and bay the moon than such a roman.", "brutus, bait not me. i'll not endure it. you forget yourself to hedge me in. i am a soldier, i, older in practice, abler than yourself to make conditions.", "go to. you are not, cassius.", "i am.", "i say you are not.", "urge me no more, i shall forget myself. have mind upon your health, tempt me no further.", "away, slight man!", "is 't possible?", "hear me, for i will speak. must i give way and room to your rash choler? shall i be frighted when a madman stares?", "o ye gods, ye gods, must i endure all this?"], ["\"all this\"? ay, more. fret till your proud heart break. go show your slaves how choleric you are and make your bondmen tremble. must i budge? must i observe you? must i stand and crouch under your testy humor? by the gods, you shall digest the venom of your spleen, though it do split you. for from this day forth, i'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter, when you are waspish.", "is it come to this?", "you say you are a better soldier. let it appear so. make your vaunting true, and it shall please me well. for mine own part, i shall be glad to learn of noble men.", "you wrong me every way. you wrong me, brutus. i said an elder soldier, not a better. did i say \"better\"?", "if you did, i care not.", "when caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.", "peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.", "i durst not!", "no.", "what, durst not tempt him?"], ["for your life you durst not.", "do not presume too much upon my love. i may do that i shall be sorry for.", "you have done that you should be sorry for. there is no terror, cassius, in your threats, for i am armed so strong in honesty that they pass by me as the idle wind, which i respect not. i did send to you for certain sums of gold, which you denied me, for i can raise no money by vile means. by heaven, i had rather coin my heart and drop my blood for drachmas than to wring from the hard hands of peasants their vile trash by any indirection. i did send to you for gold to pay my legions, which you denied me. was that done like cassius? should i have answered caius cassius so? when marcus brutus grows so covetous to lock such rascal counters from his friends, be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts. dash him to pieces!", "i denied you not.", "you did.", "i did not. he was but a fool that brought my answer back. brutus hath rived my heart. a friend should bear his friend's infirmities, but brutus makes mine greater than they are.", "i do not, till you practice them on me."], ["you love me not.", "i do not like your faults.", "a friendly eye could never see such faults.", "a flatterer's would not, though they do appear as huge as high olympus.", "come, antony, and young octavius, come, revenge yourselves alone on cassius, for cassius is aweary of the world hated by one he loves; braved by his brother; checked like a bondman, all his faults observed, set in a notebook, learned, and conned by rote to cast into my teeth. oh, i could weep my spirit from mine eyes. brutus there is my dagger. and here my naked breast. within, a heart dearer than plutus' mine, richer than gold. if that thou beest a roman, take it forth. i, that denied thee gold, will give my heart. strike, as thou didst at caesar. for i know when thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better than ever thou lovedst cassius.", "sheathe your dagger. be angry when you will, it shall have scope. do what you will, dishonor shall be humor. o cassius, you are yokd with a lamb that carries anger as the flint bears fire, who, much enforcd, shows a hasty spark and straight is cold again."], ["hath cassius lived to be but mirth and laughter to his brutus, when grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?", "when i spoke that, i was ill-tempered too.", "do you confess so much? give me your hand.", "and my heart too.", "o brutus!", "what's the matter?", "have not you love enough to bear with me, when that rash humor which my mother gave me makes me forgetful?", "yes, cassius. and from henceforth when you are over-earnest with your brutus, he'll think your mother chides and leave you so.", "let me go in to see the generals. there is some grudge between 'em. 'tis not meet they be alone.", "you shall not come to them.", "nothing but death shall stay me."], ["how now? what's the matter?", "for shame, you generals! what do you mean? love, and be friends as two such men should be. for i have seen more years, i'm sure, than ye.", "ha, ha, how vilely doth this cynic rhyme!", "poet get you hence, sirrah. saucy fellow, hence!", "bear with him, brutus. 'tis his fashion.", "i'll know his humor when he knows his time. what should the wars do with these jigging fools? companion, hence!", "away, away, be gone.", "lucillius and titinius, bid the commanders prepare to lodge their companies tonight.", "and come yourselves, and bring messala with you, immediately to us.", "lucius, a bowl of wine!", "i did not think you could have been so angry."], ["o cassius, i am sick of many griefs.", "of your philosophy you make no use if you give place to accidental evils.", "no man bears sorrow better. portia is dead.", "ha, portia?", "she is dead.", "how 'scaped i killing when i crossed you so? o insupportable and touching loss! upon what sickness?", "impatient of my absence, and grief that young octavius with mark antony have made themselves so strong for with her death that tidings came with this she fell distract and, her attendants absent, swallowed fire.", "and died so?", "even so.", "o ye immortal gods!"], ["speak no more of her. give me a bowl of wine. in this i bury all unkindness, cassius.", "my heart is thirsty for that noble pledge. fill, lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup. i cannot drink too much of brutus' love.", "come in, titinius. welcome, good messala! now sit we close about this taper here and call in question our necessities.", "portia, art thou gone?", "no more, i pray you. messala, i have here receivd letters that young octavius and mark antony come down upon us with a mighty power, bending their expedition toward philippi.", "myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.", "with what addition?", "that by proscription and bills of outlawry, octavius, antony, and lepidus have put to death an hundred senators."], ["therein our letters do not well agree. mine speak of seventy senators that died by their proscriptions, cicero being one.", "cicero one?", "cicero is dead, and by that order of proscription. brutus had you your letters from your wife, my lord?", "no, messala.", "nor nothing in your letters writ of her?", "nothing, messala.", "that methinks is strange.", "why ask you? hear you aught of her in yours?", "no, my lord.", "now, as you are a roman, tell me true.", "then like a roman bear the truth i tell. for certain she is dead, and by strange manner.", "why, farewell, portia. we must die, messala. with meditating that she must die once, i have the patience to endure it now.", "even so great men great losses should endure."], ["i have as much of this in art as you, but yet my nature could not bear it so.", "well, to our work alive. what do you think of marching to philippi presently?", "i do not think it good.", "your reason?", "this it is: 'tis better that the enemy seek us. so shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers, doing himself offense, whilst we, lying still, are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.", "good reasons must of force give place to better. the people 'twixt philippi and this ground do stand but in a forced affection, for they have grudged us contribution. the enemy, marching along by them, by them shall make a fuller number up, come on refreshed, new-added, and encouraged, from which advantage shall we cut him off if at philippi we do face him there, these people at our back.", "hear me, good brother", "under your pardon. you must note beside, that we have tried the utmost of our friends, our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe. the enemy increaseth every day. we, at the height, are ready to decline. there is a tide in the affairs of men, which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune; omitted, all the voyage of their life is bound in shallows and in miseries. on such a full sea are we now afloat, and we must take the current when it serves or lose our ventures."], ["then, with your will, go on. we'll along ourselves, and meet them at philippi.", "the deep of night is crept upon our talk, and nature must obey necessity, which we will niggard with a little rest. there is no more to say?", "no more. good night. early tomorrow will we rise and hence.", "lucius!", "my gown.", "farewell, good messala. good night, titinius. noble, noble cassius, good night and good repose.", "o my dear brother, this was an ill beginning of the night. never come such division 'tween our souls. let it not, brutus."], ["everything is well.", "good night, my lord.", "good night, good brother.", "good night, lord brutus.", "farewell, everyone.", "give me the gown. where is thy instrument?", "here in the tent.", "what, thou speak'st drowsily? poor knave, i blame thee not. thou art o'erwatched. call claudio and some other of my men. i'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.", "varrus and claudio!", "calls my lord?", "i pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep. it may be i shall raise you by and by on business to my brother cassius.", "so please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure."], ["i will not have it so. lie down, good sirs. it may be i shall otherwise bethink me. look, lucius, here's the book i sought for so. i put it in the pocket of my gown.", "i was sure your lordship did not give it me.", "bear with me, good boy, i am much forgetful. canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile, and touch thy instrument a strain or two?", "ay, my lord, an 't please you.", "it does, my boy. i trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.", "it is my duty, sir.", "i should not urge thy duty past thy might. i know young bloods look for a time of rest.", "i have slept, my lord, already.", "it was well done, and thou shalt sleep again. i will not hold thee long. if i do live, i will be good to thee.", "this is a sleepy tune. o murderous slumber, layst thou thy leaden mace upon my boy that plays thee music? gentle knave, good night. i will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee. if thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument. i'll take it from thee. and, good boy, good night. let me see, let me see. is not the leaf turned down where i left reading? here it is, i think."], ["how ill this taper burns! ha, who comes here? i think it is the weakness of mine eyes that shapes this monstrous apparition. it comes upon me. art thou any thing? art thou some god, some angel, or some devil that makest my blood cold and my hair to stare? speak to me what thou art.", "thy evil spirit, brutus.", "why comest thou?", "to tell thee thou shalt see me at philippi.", "well, then i shall see thee again?", "ay, at philippi.", "why, i will see thee at philippi, then.", "now i have taken heart thou vanishest. ill spirit, i would hold more talk with thee. boy, lucius! varrus! claudio! sirs, awake! claudio!", "the strings, my lord, are false."], ["he thinks he still is at his instrument. lucius, awake.", "my lord?", "didst thou dream, lucius, that thou so criedst out?", "my lord, i do not know that i did cry.", "yes, that thou didst. didst thou see any thing?", "nothing, my lord.", "sleep again, lucius. sirrah claudio! varrus fellow thou, awake!", "my lord?", "my lord?", "why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?", "did we, my lord?", "ay. saw you anything?", "no, my lord, i saw nothing.", "nor i, my lord."], ["go and commend me to my brother cassius. bid him set on his powers betimes before, and we will follow.", "it shall be done, my lord."], ["now, antony, our hopes are answerd. you said the enemy would not come down but keep the hills and upper regions. it proves not so. their battles are at hand. they mean to warn us at philippi here, answering before we do demand of them.", "tut, i am in their bosoms, and i know wherefore they do it. they could be content to visit other places, and come down with fearful bravery, thinking by this face to fasten in our thoughts that they have courage. but 'tis not so.", "prepare you, generals. the enemy comes on in gallant show. their bloody sign of battle is hung out, and something to be done immediately.", "octavius, lead your battle softly on, upon the left hand of the even field.", "upon the right hand i. keep thou the left.", "why do you cross me in this exigent?"], ["i do not cross you. but i will do so.", "they stand and would have parley.", "stand fast, titinius. we must out and talk.", "mark antony, shall we give sign of battle?", "no, caesar, we will answer on their charge. make forth. the generals would have some words.", "stir not until the signal.", "words before blows. is it so, countrymen?", "not that we love words better, as you do.", "good words are better than bad strokes, octavius.", "in your bad strokes, brutus, you give good words. witness the hole you made in caesar's heart, crying \"long live, hail, caesar!\"", "antony, the posture of your blows are yet unknown. but for your words, they rob the hybla bees and leave them honeyless."], ["not stingless too?", "oh, yes, and soundless too. for you have stol'n their buzzing, antony, and very wisely threat before you sting.", "villains, you did not so when your vile daggers hacked one another in the sides of caesar. you showed your teeth like apes, and fawned like hounds, and bowed like bondmen, kissing caesar's feet, whilst damnd casca, like a cur, behind struck caesar on the neck. o you flatterers!", "flatterers? now, brutus, thank yourself. this tongue had not offended so today if cassius might have ruled.", "come, come, the cause. if arguing make us sweat, the proof of it will turn to redder drops. look, i draw a sword against conspirators. when think you that the sword goes up again? never, till caesar's three and thirty wounds be well avenged, or till another caesar have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.", "caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands unless thou bring'st them with thee.", "so i hope. i was not born to die on brutus' sword.", "o, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain, young man, thou couldst not die more honorable."], ["a peevish schoolboy, worthless of such honor, joined with a masker and a reveler!", "old cassius still.", "come, antony, away. defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth. if you dare fight today, come to the field. if not, when you have stomachs.", "why, now, blow wind, swell billow, and swim bark! the storm is up and all is on the hazard.", "ho, lucillius, hark, a word with you.", "my lord?", "messala!", "what says my general?", "messala, this is my birthday, as this very day was cassius born. give me thy hand, messala. be thou my witness that against my will, as pompey was, am i compelled to set upon one battle all our liberties."], ["you know that i held epicurus strong and his opinion. now i change my mind, and partly credit things that do presage. coming from sardis, on our former ensign two mighty eagles fell, and there they perched, gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands, who to philippi here consorted us. this morning are they fled away and gone, and in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites fly o'er our heads and downward look on us as we were sickly prey. their shadows seem a canopy most fatal, under which our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.", "believe not so.", "i but believe it partly, for i am fresh of spirit and resolved to meet all perils very constantly.", "lucillius even so, lucillius.", "now, most noble brutus, the gods today stand friendly that we may, lovers in peace, lead on our days to age. but since the affairs of men rest still incertain, let's reason with the worst that may befall. if we do lose this battle, then is this the very last time we shall speak together. what are you then determind to do?"], ["even by the rule of that philosophy by which i did blame cato for the death which he did give himself (i know not how, but i do find it cowardly and vile, for fear of what might fall, so to prevent the time of life), arming myself with patience to stay the providence of some high powers that govern us below.", "then if we lose this battle you are contented to be led in triumph thorough the streets of rome?", "no, cassius, no. think not, thou noble roman, that ever brutus will go bound to rome. he bears too great a mind. but this same day must end that work the ides of march begun. and whether we shall meet again i know not. therefore our everlasting farewell take. forever and forever farewell, cassius. if we do meet again, why, we shall smile. if not, why then this parting was well made.", "forever and forever farewell, brutus. if we do meet again, we'll smile indeed. if not, 'tis true this parting was well made.", "why then, lead on. oh, that a man might know the end of this day's business ere it come! but it sufficeth that the day will end, and then the end is known. come, ho! away!"], ["ride, ride, messala, ride, and give these bills unto the legions on the other side.", "let them set on at once, for i perceive but cold demeanor in octavius' wing, and sudden push gives them the overthrow. ride, ride, messala. let them all come down."], ["o, look, titinius, look, the villains fly! myself have to mine own turned enemy. this ensign here of mine was turning back. i slew the coward and did take it from him.", "o cassius, brutus gave the word too early, who, having some advantage on octavius, took it too eagerly. his soldiers fell to spoil, whilst we by antony are all enclosed.", "fly further off, my lord, fly further off. mark antony is in your tents, my lord. fly, therefore, noble cassius, fly far off.", "this hill is far enough. look, look, titinius. are those my tents where i perceive the fire?", "they are, my lord.", "titinius, if thou lovest me, mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurs in him till he have brought thee up to yonder troops and here again, that i may rest assured whether yond troops are friend or enemy."], ["i will be here again, even with a thought.", "go, pindarus, get higher on that hill. my sight was ever thick. regard titinius, and tell me what thou notest about the field.", "this day i breathed first. time is come round, and where i did begin, there shall i end. my life is run his compass. pindarus sirrah, what news?", "o my lord!", "what news?", "titinius is enclosd round about with horsemen, that make to him on the spur. yet he spurs on. now they are almost on him. now, titinius. now some light. oh, he lights too. he's ta'en.", "and, hark! they shout for joy.", "come down, behold no more. oh, coward that i am, to live so long to see my best friend ta'en before my face!"], ["come hither, sirrah. in parthia did i take thee prisoner. and then i swore thee, saving of thy life, that whatsoever i did bid thee do, thou shouldst attempt it. come now, keep thine oath. pindarus now be a free man, and with this good sword that ran through caesar's bowels, search this bosom. stand not to answer. here take thou the hilts and, when my face is covered, as 'tis now, guide thou the sword.", "caesar, thou art revenged, even with the sword that killed thee.", "so i am free. yet would not so have been, durst i have done my will. o cassius, far from this country pindarus shall run, where never roman shall take note of him.", "it is but change, titinius, for octavius is overthrown by noble brutus' power, as cassius' legions are by antony.", "these tidings will well comfort cassius.", "where did you leave him?"], ["all disconsolate, with pindarus his bondman on this hill.", "is not that he that lies upon the ground?", "he lies not like the living. o my heart!", "is not that he?", "no, this was he, messala, but cassius is no more. o setting sun, as in thy red rays thou dost sink tonight, so in his red blood cassius' day is set. the sun of rome is set. our day is gone. clouds, dews, and dangers come! our deeds are done. mistrust of my success hath done this deed.", "mistrust of good success hath done this deed. o hateful error, melancholy's child, why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men the things that are not? o error, soon conceived, thou never comest unto a happy birth but kill'st the mother that engendered thee!", "what, pindarus! where art thou, pindarus?", "seek him, titinius, whilst i go to meet the noble brutus, thrusting this report into his ears. i may say \"thrusting\" it, for piercing steel and darts envenomd shall be as welcome to the ears of brutus as tidings of this sight."], ["hie you, messala, and i will seek for pindarus the while.", "why didst thou send me forth, brave cassius? did i not meet thy friends? and did not they put on my brows this wreath of victory and bid me give it thee? didst thou not hear their shouts? alas, thou hast misconstrued everything! but, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow. thy brutus bid me give it thee, and i will do his bidding. cassius brutus, come apace, and see how i regarded caius cassius. by your leave, gods, this is a roman's part. come, cassius' sword, and find titinius' heart. cassius", "where, where, messala, doth his body lie?", "lo, yonder, and titinius mourning it.", "titinius' face is upward.", "he is slain.", "o julius caesar, thou art mighty yet! thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords in our own proper entrails."], ["brave titinius! look whe 'er he have not crowned dead cassius.", "are yet two romans living such as these? the last of all the romans, fare thee well! it is impossible that ever rome should breed thy fellow. friends, i owe more tears to this dead man than you shall see me pay. i shall find time, cassius, i shall find time. come, therefore, and to thasos send his body. his funerals shall not be in our camp, lest it discomfort us. lucillius, come. and come, young cato. let us to the field. labio and flavio, set our battles on. 'tis three o'clock, and, romans, yet ere night we shall try fortune in a second fight."], ["yet, countrymen, o, yet hold up your heads!", "what bastard doth not? who will go with me? i will proclaim my name about the field. i am the son of marcus cato, ho! a foe to tyrants, and my country's friend. i am the son of marcus cato, ho!", "and i am brutus, marcus brutus, i! brutus, my country's friend. know me for brutus!", "o young and noble cato, art thou down? why, now thou diest as bravely as titinius, and mayst be honored, being cato's son.", "lucillius yield, or thou diest.", "only i yield to die. there is so much that thou wilt kill me straight. kill brutus, and be honored in his death.", "we must not. a noble prisoner!"], ["room, ho! tell antony brutus is ta'en.", "i'll tell the news. here comes the general. brutus is ta'en, brutus is ta'en, my lord.", "where is he?", "safe, antony. brutus is safe enough. i dare assure thee that no enemy shall ever take alive the noble brutus. the gods defend him from so great a shame! when you do find him, or alive or dead, he will be found like brutus, like himself.", "soldiers this is not brutus, friend, but, i assure you, a prize no less in worth. keep this man safe. give him all kindness. i had rather have such men my friends than enemies. go on, and see whether brutus be alive or dead. and bring us word unto octavius' tent how everything is chanced."], ["come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.", "statilius showed the torchlight but, my lord, he came not back. he is or ta'en or slain.", "sit thee down, clitus. slaying is the word. it is a deed in fashion. hark thee, clitus. clitus", "what, i, my lord? no, not for all the world.", "peace then! no words.", "i'll rather kill myself.", "hark thee, dardanius. dardanius", "shall i do such a deed?", "o dardanius!", "o clitus!", "dardanius what ill request did brutus make to thee?", "clitus to kill him, clitus. look, he meditates."], ["dardanius now is that noble vessel full of grief, that it runs over even at his eyes.", "come hither, good volumnius. list a word.", "what says my lord?", "why this, volumnius: the ghost of caesar hath appeared to me two several times by night. at sardis once, and this last night here in philippi fields. i know my hour is come.", "not so, my lord.", "nay, i am sure it is, volumnius. thou seest the world, volumnius, how it goes. our enemies have beat us to the pit.", "it is more worthy to leap in ourselves than tarry till they push us. good volumnius, thou know'st that we two went to school together. even for that our love of old, i prithee, hold thou my sword hilts, whilst i run on it.", "that's not an office for a friend, my lord.", "fly, fly, my lord. there is no tarrying here."], ["farewell to you. and you. and you, volumnius. strato, thou hast been all this while asleep. farewell to thee too, strato. countrymen, my heart doth joy that yet in all my life i found no man but he was true to me. i shall have glory by this losing day more than octavius and mark antony by this vile conquest shall attain unto. so fare you well at once, for brutus' tongue hath almost ended his life's history. night hangs upon mine eyes. my bones would rest, that have but labored to attain this hour.", "fly, my lord, fly.", "hence. i will follow.", "i prithee, strato, stay thou by thy lord. thou art a fellow of a good respect. thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it. hold then my sword and turn away thy face while i do run upon it. wilt thou, strato?", "give me your hand first. brutus' fare you well, my lord."], ["farewell, good strato. caesar, now be still. i killed not thee with half so good a will.", "what man is that?", "my master's man. strato, where is thy master?", "free from the bondage you are in, messala. the conquerors can but make a fire of him. for brutus only overcame himself, and no man else hath honor by his death.", "so brutus should be found. i thank thee, brutus, that thou hast proved lucillius' saying true.", "all that served brutus, i will entertain them. fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?", "ay, if messala will prefer me to you.", "do so, good messala.", "how died my master, strato?", "i held the sword and he did run on it.", "octavius, then take him to follow thee, that did the latest service to my master."], ["this was the noblest roman of them all. all the conspirators save only he did that they did in envy of great caesar. he only in a general honest thought and common good to all, made one of them. his life was gentle, and the elements so mixed in him that nature might stand up and say to all the world, \"this was a man.\"", "according to his virtue let us use him, with all respect and rites of burial. within my tent his bones tonight shall lie most like a soldier, ordered honorably. so call the field to rest, and let's away to part the glories of this happy day."]], [["i thought the king had more affected the duke of albany than cornwall.", "it did always seem so to us. but now in the division of the kingdom, it appears not which of the dukes he values most, for equalities are so weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice of either's moiety.", "edmund is not this your son, my lord?", "his breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. i have so often blushed to acknowledge him that now i am brazed to it.", "i cannot conceive you.", "sir, this young fellow's mother could, whereupon she grew round-wombed, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed. do you smell a fault?", "i cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.", "but i have, sir, a son by order of law, some year older than this, who yet is no dearer in my account. though this knave came something saucily to the world before he was sent for, yet was his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the whoreson must be acknowledged. do you know this noble gentleman, edmund?"], ["no, my lord.", "edmund my lord of kent. remember him hereafter as my honorable friend.", "my services to your lordship.", "i must love you and sue to know you better.", "sir, i shall study deserving.", "he hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.", "the king is coming.", "attend the lords of france and burgundy, gloucester.", "i shall, my lord.", "meantime we shall express our darker purpose. give me the map there. know that we have divided in three our kingdom, and 'tis our fast intent to shake all cares and business from our age, conferring them on younger strengths while we unburdened crawl toward death. our son of cornwall, and you, our no less loving son of albany, we have this hour a constant will to publish"], ["our daughters' several dowers, that future strife may be prevented now. the two great princes, france and burgundy, great rivals in our youngest daughter's love, long in our court have made their amorous sojourn, and here are to be answered. tell me, my daughters, (since now we will divest us both of rule, interest of territory, cares of state) which of you shall we say doth love us most that we our largest bounty may extend where nature doth with merit challenge? goneril, our eldest born, speak first.", "sir, i do love you more than words can wield the matter, dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty, beyond what can be valued, rich or rare, no less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honor, as much as child e'er loved or father found a love that makes breath poor and speech unable. beyond all manner of so much i love you.", "what shall cordelia speak? love, and be silent.", "of all these bounds, even from this line to this, with shadowy forests and with champains riched, with plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads, we make thee lady. to thine and albany's issue be this perpetual. what says our second daughter, our dearest regan, wife of cornwall? speak.", "sir, i am made of that self mettle as my sister, and prize me at her worth. in my true heart, i find she names my very deed of love only she comes too short, that i profess"], ["myself an enemy to all other joys, which the most precious square of sense possesses. and find i am alone felicitate in your dear highness' love.", "then poor cordelia! and yet not so, since i am sure my love's more ponderous than my tongue.", "to thee and thine hereditary ever remain this ample third of our fair kingdom, no less in space, validity, and pleasure than that conferred on goneril. but now, our joy, although our last and least, to whose young love the vines of france and milk of burgundy strive to be interessed. what can you say to draw a third more opulent than your sisters? speak.", "nothing, my lord.", "nothing?", "nothing.", "how? nothing will come of nothing. speak again.", "unhappy that i am, i cannot heave my heart into my mouth. i love your majesty according to my bond, no more nor less.", "how, how, cordelia? mend your speech a little, lest you may mar your fortunes.", "good my lord, you have begot me, bred me, loved me. i return those duties back as are right fit"], ["obey you, love you, and most honor you. why have my sisters husbands if they say they love you all? haply when i shall wed that lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry half my love with him, half my care and duty. sure, i shall never marry like my sisters, to love my father all.", "but goes thy heart with this?", "ay, good my lord.", "so young and so untender?", "so young, my lord, and true.", "let it be so. thy truth then be thy dower. for by the sacred radiance of the sun, the mysteries of hecate and the night, by all the operation of the orbs from whom we do exist and cease to be here i disclaim all my paternal care, propinquity, and property of blood, and as a stranger to my heart and me hold thee from this for ever. the barbarous scythian, or he that makes his generation messes to gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom be as well neighbored, pitied, and relieved as thou my sometime daughter.", "good my liege", "peace, kent. come not between the dragon and his wrath. i loved her most and thought to set my rest on her kind nursery."], ["cordelia hence, and avoid my sight! so be my grave my peace as here i give her father's heart from her. call france. who stirs? call burgundy.", "cornwall and albany, with my two daughters' dowers digest this third. let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her. i do invest you jointly with my power, preeminence, and all the large effects that troop with majesty. ourself, by monthly course, with reservation of an hundred knights by you to be sustained, shall our abode make with you by due turns. only shall we retain the name, and all th' additions to a king. the sway, revenue, execution of the rest, belovd sons, be yours; which to confirm, this coronet part between you. cornwall albany", "royal lear, whom i have ever honored as my king, loved as my father, as my master followed, as my great patron thought on in my prayers", "the bow is bent and drawn. make from the shaft.", "let it fall rather, though the fork invade the region of my heart. be kent unmannerly when lear is mad. what wouldst thou do, old man? think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak when power to flattery bows? to plainness honor's bound when majesty falls to folly. reserve thy state,"], ["and in thy best consideration check this hideous rashness. answer my life my judgment, thy youngest daughter does not love thee least, nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound reverbs no hollowness.", "kent, on thy life, no more.", "my life i never held but as a pawn to wage against thy enemies, nor fear to lose it, thy safety being motive.", "out of my sight!", "see better, lear, and let me still remain the true blank of thine eye.", "now, by apollo", "now, by apollo, king, thou swear'st thy gods in vain.", "o vassal! miscreant!", "dear sir, forbear!", "do, kill thy physician, and the fee bestow upon thy foul disease. revoke thy gift, or whilst i can vent clamor from my throat, i'll tell thee thou dost evil.", "hear me, recreant! on thine allegiance hear me. that thou hast sought to make us break our vows, which we durst never yet, and with strained pride to come betwixt our sentence and our power, which nor our nature nor our place can bear,"], ["our potency made good, take thy reward: five days we do allot thee for provision to shield thee from diseases of the world. and on the sixth to turn thy hated back upon our kingdom. if on the next day following thy banished trunk be found in our dominions, the moment is thy death. away! by jupiter, this shall not be revoked.", "why, fare thee well, king. sith thus thou wilt appear, freedom lives hence, and banishment is here. cordelia the gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid, that justly think'st and hast most rightly said! regan goneril and your large speeches may your deeds approve, that good effects may spring from words of love. thus kent, o princes, bids you all adieu. he'll shape his old course in a country new.", "here's france and burgundy, my noble lord.", "my lord of burgundy. we first address towards you, who with this king hath rivaled for our daughter. what in the least will you require in present dower with her or cease your quest of love?"], ["most royal majesty, i crave no more than hath your highness offered. nor will you tender less.", "right noble burgundy, when she was dear to us we did hold her so, but now her price is fallen. sir, there she stands. if aught within that little seeming substance, or all of it, with our displeasure pieced and nothing more, may fitly like your grace, she's there, and she is yours.", "i know no answer.", "sir, will you, with those infirmities she owes unfriended, new adopted to our hate, dowered with our curse and strangered with our oath take her or leave her?", "pardon me, royal sir. election makes not up in such conditions.", "then leave her, sir, for by the power that made me, i tell you all her wealth. france for you, great king, i would not from your love make such a stray to match you where i hate. therefore beseech you t' avert your liking a more worthier way than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed almost t' acknowledge hers.", "this is most strange, that she that even but now was your best object the argument of your praise, balm of your age, most best, most dearest should in this trice of time"], ["commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle so many folds of favor. sure, her offense must be of such unnatural degree that monsters it (or your fore-vouched affection fall into taint), which to believe of her must be a faith that reason without miracle could never plant in me.", "lear i yet beseech your majesty, if for i want that glib and oily art to speak and purpose not since what i well intend, i'll do 't before i speak that you make known it is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness, no unchaste action or dishonored step that hath deprived me of your grace and favor, but even for want of that for which i am richer: a still-soliciting eye and such a tongue as i am glad i have not, though not to have it hath lost me in your liking.", "go to, go to. better thou hadst not been born than not t' have pleased me better.", "is it no more but this a tardiness in nature which often leaves the history unspoke that it intends to do? my lord of burgundy, what say you to the lady? love's not love when it is mingled with regards that stands aloof from th' entire point. will you have her? she is herself a dowry.", "lear royal king, give but that portion which yourself proposed, and here i take cordelia by the hand, duchess of burgundy."], ["nothing. i have sworn. i am firm.", "cordelia i am sorry then. you have so lost a father that you must lose a husband.", "peace be with burgundy. since that respects and fortunes are his love, i shall not be his wife.", "fairest cordelia, that art most rich being poor, most choice forsaken, and most loved despised! thee and thy virtues here i seize upon, be it lawful i take up what's cast away. gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect my love should kindle to inflamed respect. thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my chance, is queen of us, of ours, and our fair france. not all the dukes of waterish burgundy can buy this unprized precious maid of me. bid them farewell, cordelia, though unkind. thou losest here, a better where to find.", "thou hast her, france. let her be thine, for we have no such daughter, nor shall ever see that face of hers again. cordelia therefore be gone without our grace, our love, our benison. come, noble burgundy.", "bid farewell to your sisters."], ["the jewels of our father, with washed eyes cordelia leaves you. i know you what you are, and like a sister am most loath to call your faults as they are named. love well our father. to your professd bosoms i commit him. but yet, alas, stood i within his grace, i would prefer him to a better place. so farewell to you both.", "prescribe not us our duty.", "let your study be to content your lord, who hath received you at fortune's alms. you have obedience scanted, and well are worth the want that you have wanted.", "time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides, who covers faults at last with shame derides. well may you prosper.", "come, my fair cordelia.", "sister, it is not a little i have to say of what most nearly appertains to us both. i think our father will hence tonight.", "that's most certain, and with you. next month with us.", "you see how full of changes his age is. the observation we have made of it hath not been little. he always loved our sister most, and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off appears too grossly."], ["'tis the infirmity of his age. yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself.", "the best and soundest of his time hath been but rash. then must we look from his age to receive not alone the imperfections of long-engrafted condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with them.", "such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of kent's banishment.", "there is further compliment of leave-taking between france and him. pray you, let's sit together. if our father carry authority with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his will but offend us.", "we shall further think on 't.", "we must do something, and i' th' heat."], ["thou, nature, art my goddess. to thy law my services are bound. wherefore should i stand in the plague of custom and permit the curiosity of nations to deprive me for that i am some twelve or fourteen moonshines lag of a brother? why \"bastard\"? wherefore \"base\"? when my dimensions are as well compact, my mind as generous, and my shape as true as honest madam's issue? why brand they us with \"base,\" with \"baseness,\" \"bastardy,\" \"base,\" \"base\" who in the lusty stealth of nature take more composition and fierce quality than doth within a dull, stale, tird bed go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops got 'tween a sleep and wake? well then, legitimate edgar, i must have your land. our father's love is to the bastard edmund as to the legitimate. fine word, \"legitimate\"! well, my legitimate, if this letter speed and my invention thrive, edmund the base shall top th' legitimate. i grow, i prosper. now, gods, stand up for bastards!", "kent banished thus? and france in choler parted? and the king gone tonight, prescribed his power confined to exhibition? all this done upon the gad? edmund, how now? what news?"], ["so please your lordship, none.", "why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?", "i know no news, my lord.", "what paper were you reading?", "nothing, my lord.", "no? what needed, then, that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? the quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself. let's see. come, if it be nothing, i shall not need spectacles.", "i beseech you, sir, pardon me. it is a letter from my brother that i have not all o'er-read. and for so much as i have perused, i find it not fit for your o'erlooking.", "give me the letter, sir.", "i shall offend, either to detain or give it. the contents, as in part i understand them, are to blame.", "let's see, let's see.", "i hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.", "\"this policy and reverence of age makes the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish them. i begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways not as it hath power but as it is suffered."], ["come to me, that of this i may speak more. if our father would sleep till i waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue forever, and live the beloved of your brother, edgar.\" hum, conspiracy? \"'sleep till i wake him, you should enjoy half his revenue\" my son edgar? had he a hand to write this, a heart and brain to breed it in? when came this to you? who brought it?", "it was not brought me, my lord. there's the cunning of it. i found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.", "you know the character to be your brother's?", "if the matter were good, my lord, i durst swear it were his. but in respect of that, i would fain think it were not.", "it is his.", "it is his hand, my lord, but i hope his heart is not in the contents.", "has he never before sounded you in this business?", "never, my lord. but i have heard him oft maintain it to be fit that, sons at perfect age and fathers declined, the father should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.", "o villain, villain! his very opinion in the letter! abhorred villain! unnatural, detested, brutish villain worse than"], ["brutish! go, sirrah, seek him. i'll apprehend him. abominable villain! where is he?", "i do not well know, my lord. if it shall please you to suspend your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you shall run a certain course where if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honor and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience. i dare pawn down my life for him that he hath wrote this to feel my affection to your honor and to no other pretense of danger.", "think you so?", "if your honor judge it meet, i will place you where you shall hear us confer of this and by an auricular assurance have your satisfaction and that without any further delay than this very evening.", "he cannot be such a monster", "nor is not, sure.", "to his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him. heaven and earth! edmund, seek him out, wind me into him, i pray you. frame the business after your own wisdom. i would unstate myself to be in a due resolution.", "i will seek him, sir, presently, convey the business as i shall find means, and acquaint you withal.", "these late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to us. though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects. love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide, in cities"], ["mutinies, in countries discord, in palaces treason, and the bond cracked 'twixt son and father. this villain of mine comes under the prediction there's son against father. the king falls from bias of nature there's father against child. we have seen the best of our time. machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. find out this villain, edmund. it shall lose thee nothing. do it carefully. and the noble and true-hearted kent banished, his offense honesty! 'tis strange, strange.", "this is the excellent foppery of the world that when we are sick in fortune often the surfeit of our own behavior we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars, as if we were villains by necessity, fools by heavenly compulsion, knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance, drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforced obedience of planetary influence, and all that we are evil in by a divine thrusting-on. an admirable evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! my father compounded with my mother under the dragon's tail and my nativity was under ursa major, so that it follows i am rough and lecherous. fut, i should have been that i am, had the maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing. edgar", "and pat on 's cue he comes like the catastrophe of the old comedy. my cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like tom o' bedlam. oh, these eclipses do portend these divisions! fa, sol, la, mi."], ["how now, brother edmund? what serious contemplation are you in?", "i am thinking, brother, of a prediction i read this other day, what should follow these eclipses.", "do you busy yourself about that?", "i promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily as of unnaturalness between the child and the parent, death, dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities, divisions in state, menaces and maledictions against king and nobles, needless diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and i know not what.", "how long have you been a sectary astronomical?", "come, come. when saw you my father last?", "why, the night gone by.", "spake you with him?", "ay, two hours together.", "parted you in good terms? found you no displeasure in him by word or countenance?", "none at all.", "bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him. and at my entreaty forbear his presence till some little time hath qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would scarcely allay."], ["some villain hath done me wrong.", "that's my fear. i pray you, have a continent forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower. and as i say, retire with me to my lodging, from whence i will fitly bring you to hear my lord speak. pray ye, go. there's my key. if you do stir abroad, go armed.", "armed, brother?", "brother, i advise you to the best. go armed. i am no honest man if there be any good meaning towards you. i have told you what i have seen and heard but faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it. pray you, away.", "shall i hear from you anon?", "i do serve you in this business.", "a credulous father, and a brother noble whose nature is so far from doing harms that he suspects none, on whose foolish honesty my practices ride easy. i see the business. let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit. all with me's meet that i can fashion fit."], ["did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?", "ay, madam.", "by day and night he wrongs me. every hour he flashes into one gross crime or other that sets us all at odds. i'll not endure it. his knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us on every trifle. when he returns from hunting, i will not speak with him. say i am sick. if you come slack of former services, you shall do well. the fault of it i'll answer.", "he's coming, madam. i hear him.", "put on what weary negligence you please, you and your fellow servants. i'll have it come to question. if he distaste it, let him to our sister, whose mind and mine i know in that are one, not to be overruled. idle old man that still would manage those authorities that he hath given away! now by my life, old fools are babes again and must be used with checks as flatteries, when they are seen abused. remember what i have said.", "very well, madam."], ["and let his knights have colder looks among you. what grows of it, no matter. advise your fellows so. i would breed from hence occasions, and i shall, that i may speak. i'll write straight to my sister to hold my very course. go, prepare for dinner."], ["if but as well i other accents borrow, that can my speech diffuse, my good intent may carry through itself to that full issue for which i razed my likeness. now, banished kent, if thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemned, so may it come thy master, whom thou lovest, shall find thee full of labors.", "let me not stay a jot for dinner. go get it ready.", "kent how now, what art thou?", "a man, sir.", "what dost thou profess? what wouldst thou with us?", "i do profess to be no less than i seem to serve him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear judgment, to fight when i cannot choose, and to eat no fish.", "what art thou?", "a very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.", "if thou beest as poor for a subject as he's for a king, thou'rt poor enough. what wouldst thou?"], ["service.", "who wouldst thou serve?", "you.", "dost thou know me, fellow?", "no, sir. but you have that in your countenance which i would fain call master.", "what's that?", "authority.", "what services canst thou do?", "i can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message bluntly. that which ordinary men are fit for, i am qualified in. and the best of me is diligence.", "how old art thou?", "not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for anything. i have years on my back forty- eight.", "follow me. thou shalt serve me. if i like thee no worse after dinner, i will not part from thee yet. dinner, ho, dinner! where's my knave, my fool? go you, and call my fool hither."], ["you, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?", "so please you", "what says the fellow there? call the clotpoll back.", "where's my fool, ho? i think the world's asleep.", "how now? where's that mongrel?", "he says, my lord, your daughter is not well.", "why came not the slave back to me when i called him.", "sir, he answered me in the roundest manner he would not.", "he would not?", "my lord, i know not what the matter is, but to my judgment your highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as you were wont. there's a great abatement of kindness appears as well in the general dependants as in the duke himself also, and your daughter.", "ha! sayest thou so?", "i beseech you pardon me, my lord, if i be mistaken for my duty cannot be silent when i think your highness wronged."], ["thou but rememberest me of mine own conception. i have perceived a most faint neglect of late, which i have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretense and purpose of unkindness. i will look further into 't. but where's my fool? i have not seen him this two days.", "since my young lady's going into france, sir, the fool hath much pined away.", "no more of that. i have noted it well. go you and tell my daughter i would speak with her.", "go you, call hither my fool.", "o you sir, you, come you hither, sir. who am i, sir?", "my lady's father.", "\"my lady's father\"? my lord's knave, your whoreson dog! you slave, you cur!", "i am none of these, my lord. i beseech your pardon.", "do you bandy looks with me, you rascal? oswald", "i'll not be strucken, my lord.", "oswald nor tripped neither, you base football player."], ["kent i thank thee, fellow. thou servest me, and i'll love thee.", "oswald come, sir, arise, away! i'll teach you differences. away, away. if you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry. but away, go to. have you wisdom? so.", "now, my friendly knave, i thank thee.", "kent there's earnest of thy service.", "let me hire him too. here's my coxcomb. kent", "how now, my pretty knave? how dost thou?", "kent sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.", "why, fool?", "why? for taking one's part that's out of favor. nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly. there, take my coxcomb. why, this fellow has banished two on 's daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will. if thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb. how now, nuncle? would i had two coxcombs and two daughters."], ["why, my boy?", "if i gave them all my living, i'd keep my coxcombs myself. there's mine. beg another of thy daughters.", "take heed, sirrah the whip.", "truth's a dog that must to kennel. he must be whipped out, when lady brach may stand by th' fire and stink.", "a pestilent gall to me!", "sirrah, i'll teach thee a speech.", "do.", "mark it, nuncle. have more than thou showest, speak less than thou knowest, lend less than thou owest, ride more than thou goest, learn more than thou trowest, set less than thou throwest, leave thy drink and thy whore and keep in-a-door, and thou shalt have more than two tens to a score.", "this is nothing, fool.", "then 'tis like the breath of an unfee'd lawyer. you gave me nothing for 't. can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?"], ["why no, boy. nothing can be made out of nothing.", "kent prithee, tell him so much the rent of his land comes to. he will not believe a fool.", "a bitter fool.", "dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and a sweet fool?", "no, lad. teach me.", "that lord that counseled thee to give away thy land, come place him here by me. do thou for him stand. the sweet and bitter fool will presently appear the one in motley here, the other found out there.", "dost thou call me fool, boy?", "all thy other titles thou hast given away that thou wast born with.", "this is not altogether fool, my lord.", "no, faith, lords and great men will not let me. if i had a monopoly out, they would have part on 't. and ladies too they will not let me have all fool to myself; they'll be snatching. give me an egg, nuncle, and i'll give thee two crowns."], ["what two crowns shall they be?", "why after i have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up the meat the two crowns of the egg. when thou clovest thy crown i' th' middle, and gavest away both parts, thou borest thy ass o' th' back o'er the dirt. thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown when thou gavest thy golden one away. if i speak like myself in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so.", "when were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?", "i have used it, nuncle, ever since thou madest thy daughters thy mothers. for when thou gavest them the rod, and put'st down thine own breeches, prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to lie. i would fain learn to lie.", "an you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipped."], ["i marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. they'll have me whipped for speaking true, thou'lt have me whipped for lying, and sometimes i am whipped for holding my peace. i had rather be any kind o' thing than a fool. and yet i would not be thee, nuncle. thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides and left nothing i' th' middle. here comes one o' the parings.", "how now, daughter? what makes that frontlet on? methinks you are too much of late i' th' frown.", "lear thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for her frowning. now thou art an o without a figure. i am better than thou art now. i am a fool. thou art nothing. goneril yes, forsooth, i will hold my tongue. so your face bids me, though you say nothing. mum, mum, he that keeps nor crust nor crumb, weary of all, shall want some. lear that's a shelled peascod.", "lear not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool, but other of your insolent retinue do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth in rank and not-to-be-endurd riots. sir, i had thought by making this well known unto you to have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful by what yourself too late have spoke and done that you protect this course and put it on by your allowance which if you should, the fault would not 'scape censure, nor the redresses sleep which in the tender of a wholesome weal might in their working do you that offense,"], ["which else were shame, that then necessity will call discreet proceeding.", "for you know, nuncle, the hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long, that it's had it head bit off by it young. so out went the candle and we were left darkling.", "are you our daughter?", "come, sir, i would you would make use of that good wisdom whereof i know you are fraught, and put away these dispositions that of late transform you from what you rightly are.", "may not an ass know when the cart draws the horse? whoop, jug! i love thee.", "does any here know me? why, this is not lear. doth lear walk thus? speak thus? where are his eyes? either his notion weakens, or his discernings are lethargied. ha, sleeping or waking? sure, 'tis not so. who is it that can tell me who i am?", "lear's shadow.", "i would learn that. for by the marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason, i should be false persuaded i had daughters.", "which they will make an obedient father.", "goneril your name, fair gentlewoman?"], ["this admiration, sir, is much o' th' savor of other your new pranks. i do beseech you to understand my purposes aright. as you are old and reverend, should be wise. here do you keep a hundred knights and squires, men so disordered, so debauched and bold that this our court, infected with their manners, shows like a riotous inn. epicurism and lust make it more like a tavern or a brothel than a graced palace. the shame itself doth speak for instant remedy. be then desired by her that else will take the thing she begs, a little to disquantity your train, and the remainder that shall still depend to be such men as may besort your age, which know themselves and you.", "darkness and devils! saddle my horses. call my train together. degenerate bastard, i'll not trouble thee. yet have i left a daughter.", "you strike my people, and your disordered rabble make servants of their betters.", "woe that too late repents! albany o sir, are you come? is it your will? speak, sir. prepare my horses."], ["ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend, more hideous when thou show'st thee in a child than the sea monster.", "pray, sir, be patient.", "goneril detested kite, thou liest! my train are men of choice and rarest parts that all particulars of duty know and in the most exact regard support the worships of their name. o most small fault, how ugly didst thou in cordelia show, which like an engine wrenched my frame of nature from the fixed place, drew from heart all love, and added to the gall! o lear, lear, lear! beat at this gate that let thy folly in and thy dear judgment out! go, go, my people.", "my lord, i am guiltless, as i am ignorant, of what hath moved you.", "it may be so, my lord. hear, nature, hear, dear goddess, hear! suspend thy purpose if thou didst intend to make this creature fruitful. into her womb convey sterility. dry up in her the organs of increase, and from her derogate body never spring a babe to honor her. if she must teem, create her child of spleen, that it may live and be a thwart disnatured torment to her. let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth, with cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,"], ["turn all her mother's pains and benefits to laughter and contempt, that she may feel that she may feel how sharper than a serpent's tooth it is to have a thankless child. away, away!", "now gods that we adore, whereof comes this?", "never afflict yourself to know more of it, but let his disposition have that scope that dotage gives it.", "what, fifty of my followers at a clap? within a fortnight?", "what's the matter, sir?", "i'll tell thee. goneril life and death! i am ashamed that thou hast power to shake my manhood thus, that these hot tears which break from me perforce should make thee worth them. blasts and fogs upon thee! th' untented woundings of a father's curse pierce every sense about thee! old fond eyes, beweep this cause again, i'll pluck ye out"], ["and cast you, with the waters that you loose, to temper clay. yea, is 't come to this? ha? let it be so. i have another daughter, who i am sure is kind and comfortable. when she shall hear this of thee, with her nails she'll flay thy wolvish visage. thou shalt find that i'll resume the shape which thou dost think i have cast off for ever. thou shalt, i warrant thee.", "do you mark that, my lord?", "i cannot be so partial, goneril, to the great love i bear you", "pray you, content. come, sire, no more. what, oswald, ho! fool you, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.", "nuncle lear, nuncle lear, tarry and take the fool with thee. a fox when one has caught her and such a daughter should sure to the slaughter, if my cap would buy a halter. so the fool follows after.", "this man hath had good counsel a hundred knights! 'tis politic and safe to let him keep at point a hundred knights, yes, that on every dream, each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike, he may enguard his dotage with their powers and hold our lives in mercy? oswald, i say!"], ["well, you may fear too far.", "safer than trust too far. let me still take away the harms i fear, not fear still to be taken. i know his heart. what he hath uttered i have writ my sister. if she sustain him and his hundred knights when i have showed th' unfitness", "here, madam.", "how now, oswald? what, have you writ that letter to my sister?", "ay, madam.", "take you some company, and away to horse. inform her full of my particular fear, and thereto add such reasons of your own as may compact it more. get you gone and hasten your return.", "no, no, my lord, though i condemn not, yet under pardon you are much more attasked for want of wisdom than praised for harmful mildness.", "how far your eyes may pierce i cannot tell. striving to better, oft we mar what's well."], ["nay, then", "well, well, th' event."], ["kent go you before to gloucester with these letters. acquaint my daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her demand out of the letter. if your diligence be not speedy, i shall be there afore you.", "i will not sleep, my lord, till i have delivered your letter.", "if a man's brains were in 's heels, were 't not in danger of kibes?", "ay, boy.", "then, i prithee, be merry. thy wit shall ne'er go slipshod.", "ha, ha, ha!", "shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly. for though she's as like this as a crab's like an apple, yet i can tell what i can tell.", "why, what canst thou tell, my boy?", "she will taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. thou canst tell why one's nose stands i' th' middle on 's face?"], ["no.", "why, to keep one's eyes of either side 's nose, that what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.", "i did her wrong", "canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?", "no.", "nor i neither. but i can tell why a snail has a house.", "why?", "why, to put 's head in not to give it away to his daughters and leave his horns without a case.", "i will forget my nature. so kind a father! be my horses ready?", "thy asses are gone about 'em. the reason why the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.", "because they are not eight?", "yes indeed. thou wouldst make a good fool.", "to take 't again perforce monster ingratitude!"], ["if thou wert my fool, nuncle, i'd have thee beaten for being old before thy time.", "how's that?", "thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.", "o, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven! i would not be mad. keep me in temper. i would not be mad.", "how now? are the horses ready?", "ready, my lord.", "come, boy.", "she that's a maid now and laughs at my departure, shall not be a maid long unless things be cut shorter."], ["save thee, curan.", "and you, sir. i have been with your father and given him notice that the duke of cornwall and regan his duchess will be here with him this night.", "how comes that?", "nay, i know not. you have heard of the news abroad? i mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments.", "not i. pray you, what are they?", "have you heard of no likely wars toward 'twixt the two dukes of cornwall and albany?", "not a word.", "you may do then in time. fare you well, sir.", "the duke be here tonight? the better best! this weaves itself perforce into my business. my father hath set guard to take my brother. and i have one thing, of a queasy question, which i must act. briefness and fortune, work! brother, a word. descend, brother, i say."], ["my father watches. o sir, fly this place. intelligence is given where you are hid. you have now the good advantage of the night. have you not spoken 'gainst the duke of cornwall aught? he's coming hither now, i' th' night, i' th' haste, and regan with him. have you nothing said upon his party 'gainst the duke of albany? advise yourself.", "i am sure on 't, not a word.", "i hear my father coming. pardon me. in cunning i must draw my sword upon you. draw. seem to defend yourself. now quit you well. yield! come before my father. light, ho! here! edgar fly, brother, fly. torches, torches! edgar so, farewell.", "some blood drawn on me would beget opinion. of my more fierce endeavor. i have seen drunkards do more than this in sport. father, father! stop, stop! no help?", "now edmund, where's the villain?"], ["here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out, mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon to stand 's auspicious mistress", "but where is he?", "look, sir, i bleed.", "where is the villain, edmund?", "fled this way, sir, when by no means he could", "pursue him, ho! go after.", "\"by no means\" what?", "persuade me to the murder of your lordship, but that i told him the revenging gods 'gainst parricides did all the thunder bend, spoke with how manifold and strong a bond the child was bound to th' father. sir, in fine, seeing how loathly opposite i stood to his unnatural purpose, in fell motion, with his prepard sword he charges home my unprovided body, latched mine arm. and when he saw my best alarumed spirits, bold in the quarrel's right, roused to the encounter, or whether ghasted by the noise i made, full suddenly he fled.", "let him fly far. not in this land shall he remain uncaught. and found dispatch. the noble duke my master, my worthy arch and patron, comes tonight."], ["by his authority i will proclaim it that he which finds him shall deserve our thanks, bringing the murderous coward to the stake. he that conceals him, death.", "when i dissuaded him from his intent, and found him pight to do it, with cursed speech i threatened to discover him. he replied, \"thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think if i would stand against thee, would the reposal of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee make thy words faithed? no. what i should deny as this i would, ay, though thou didst produce my very character i'd turn it all to thy suggestion, plot, and damnd practice. and thou must make a dullard of the world, if they not thought the profits of my death were very pregnant and potential spirits to make thee seek it.\"", "o strange and fastened villain! would he deny his letter, said he? i never got him. hark, the duke's trumpets. i know not why he comes. all ports i'll bar. the villain shall not 'scape. the duke must grant me that. besides, his picture i will send far and near, that all the kingdom may have the due note of him. and of my land, loyal and natural boy, i'll work the means to make thee capable.", "how now, my noble friend? since i came hither, which i can call but now, i have heard strange news."], ["if it be true, all vengeance comes too short which can pursue th' offender. how dost, my lord?", "o madam, my old heart is cracked, it's cracked.", "what, did my father's godson seek your life? he whom my father named, your edgar?", "o, lady, lady, shame would have it hid.", "was he not companion with the riotous knights that tend upon my father?", "i know not, madam. 'tis too bad, too bad.", "yes, madam, he was of that consort.", "no marvel then, though he were ill affected. 'tis they have put him on the old man's death, to have th' expense and spoil of his revenues. i have this present evening from my sister been well informed of them and with such cautions that if they come to sojourn at my house i'll not be there.", "nor i, assure thee, regan. edmund, i hear that you have shown your father a childlike office.", "it was my duty, sir.", "he did bewray his practice, and received this hurt you see striving to apprehend him.", "is he pursued?"], ["ay, my good lord.", "if he be taken, he shall never more be feared of doing harm. make your own purpose how in my strength you please. for you, edmund, whose virtue and obedience doth this instant so much commend itself, you shall be ours. natures of such deep trust we shall much need. you we first seize on.", "i shall serve you, sir, truly, however else.", "cornwall for him i thank your grace.", "you know not why we came to visit you", "thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night. occasions, noble gloucester, of some poise, wherein we must have use of your advice: our father he hath writ, so hath our sister, of differences, which i least thought it fit to answer from our home. the several messengers from hence attend dispatch. our good old friend, lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow your needful counsel to our business, which craves the instant use.", "i serve you, madam. your graces are right welcome."], ["good dawning to thee, friend. art of this house?", "ay.", "where may we set our horses?", "i' th' mire.", "prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.", "i love thee not.", "why, then, i care not for thee.", "if i had thee in lipsbury pinfold, i would make thee care for me.", "why dost thou use me thus? i know thee not.", "fellow, i know thee.", "what dost thou know me for?", "a knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats; a base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy, worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered, action-taking knave; a whoreson, glass-gazing, super-serviceable finical rogue; one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of good service; and art nothing but the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch; one whom i will beat into clamorous whining if thou deniest the least syllable of thy addition."], ["why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!", "what a brazen-faced varlet art thou to deny thou knowest me! is it two days ago since i tripped up thy heels and beat thee before the king? draw, you rogue, for though it be night yet the moon shines. i'll make a sop o' th' moonshine of you. draw, you whoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw!", "away! i have nothing to do with thee.", "draw, you rascal. you come with letters against the king and take vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her father. draw, you rogue, or i'll so carbonado your shanks. draw, you rascal! come your ways.", "help, ho! murder! help!", "strike, you slave. stand, rogue. stand, you neat slave, strike! oswald", "help, ho! murder, murder!", "how now? what's the matter? part.", "edmund with you, goodman boy, if you please. come, i'll flesh ye. come on, young master."], ["weapons, arms? what's the matter here?", "keep peace, upon your lives. he dies that strikes again. what is the matter?", "the messengers from our sister and the king.", "what is your difference? speak.", "i am scarce in breath, my lord.", "no marvel, you have so bestirred your valor. you cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee. a tailor made thee.", "thou art a strange fellow. a tailor make a man?", "ay, a tailor, sir. a stone-cutter or painter could not have made him so ill though they had been but two years o' th' trade.", "speak yet. how grew your quarrel?", "this ancient ruffian, sir, whose life i have spared at suit of his gray beard", "thou whoreson zed, thou unnecessary letter! my lord, if you will give me leave, i will tread this unbolted villain into mortar and daub the wall of a jakes with him. spare my gray beard, you wagtail?", "peace, sirrah! you beastly knave, know you no reverence?", "yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege."], ["why art thou angry?", "that such a slave as this should wear a sword, who wears no honesty. such smiling rogues as these, like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain which are too intrinse t' unloose, smooth every passion that in the natures of their lords rebel, bring oil to fire, snow to the colder moods; renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks with every gale and vary of their masters, knowing naught, like dogs, but following. a plague upon your epileptic visage! smile you my speeches as i were a fool? goose, an i had you upon sarum plain, i'd drive ye cackling home to camelot.", "why, art thou mad, old fellow?", "kent how fell you out? say that.", "no contraries hold more antipathy than i and such a knave.", "why dost thou call him \"knave\"? what's his offense?", "his countenance likes me not.", "no more perchance does mine, nor his, nor hers.", "sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain. i have seen better faces in my time than stands on any shoulder that i see before me at this instant."], ["this is some fellow, who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect a saucy roughness and constrains the garb quite from his nature. he cannot flatter, he. an honest mind and plain, he must speak truth. an they will take it, so. if not, he's plain. these kind of knaves i know, which in this plainness harbor more craft and more corrupter ends than twenty silly-ducking observants that stretch their duties nicely.", "sir, in good faith, or in sincere verity, under th' allowance of your great aspect, whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire on flickering phoebus' front", "what mean'st by this?", "to go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. i know, sir, i am no flatterer. he that beguiled you in a plain accent was a plain knave, which for my part i will not be, though i should win your displeasure to entreat me to 't.", "oswald what was th' offense you gave him?", "i never gave him any. it pleased the king his master very late to strike at me upon his misconstruction when he, conjunct and flattering his displeasure, tripped me behind; being down, insulted, railed, and put upon him such a deal of man that worthied him, got praises of the king for him attempting who was self-subdued. and in the fleshment of this dread exploit drew on me here again."], ["none of these rogues and cowards but ajax is their fool.", "fetch forth the stocks, ho! you stubborn ancient knave, you reverend braggart, we'll teach you.", "sir, i am too old to learn. call not your stocks for me. i serve the king, on whose employment i was sent to you. you shall do small respect, show too bold malice against the grace and person of my master, stocking his messenger.", "fetch forth the stocks! as i have life and honor, there shall he sit till noon.", "till noon? till night, my lord, and all night too.", "why, madam, if i were your father's dog, you should not use me so.", "sir, being his knave, i will.", "this is a fellow of the selfsame color our sister speaks of. come, bring away the stocks!", "let me beseech your grace not to do so. his fault is much, and the good king his master will check him for 't. your purposed low correction is such as basest and contemned'st wretches for pilferings and most common trespasses are punished with."], ["the king his master needs must take it ill, that he, so slightly valued in his messenger, should have him thus restrained.", "i'll answer that.", "my sister may receive it much more worse to have her gentleman abused, assaulted for following her affairs. put in his legs.", "gloucester come, my good lord, away.", "i am sorry for thee, friend. 'tis the duke's pleasure, whose disposition, all the world well knows, will not be rubbed nor stopped. i'll entreat for thee.", "pray you do not, sir. i have watched and traveled hard. some time i shall sleep out. the rest i'll whistle. a good man's fortune may grow out at heels. give you good morrow.", "the duke's to blame in this. 'twill be ill taken."], ["good king, that must approve the common saw, thou out of heaven's benediction comest to the warm sun. approach, thou beacon to this underglobe, that by thy comfortable beams i may peruse this letter. nothing almost sees miracles but misery. i know 'tis from cordelia, who hath most fortunately been informed of my obscurd course and \"shall find time from this enormous state, seeking to give losses their remedies.\" all weary and o'erwatched, take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold this shameful lodging. fortune, good night. smile once more. turn thy wheel."], ["i heard myself proclaimed, and by the happy hollow of a tree escaped the hunt. no port is free, no place that guard and most unusual vigilance does not attend my taking. whiles i may 'scape, i will preserve myself, and am bethought to take the basest and most poorest shape that ever penury in contempt of man brought near to beast. my face i'll grime with filth, blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots, and with presented nakedness outface the winds and persecutions of the sky. the country gives me proof and precedent of bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices strike in their numbed and mortified bare arms pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary, and with this horrible object from low farms, poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills, sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers, enforce their charity. \"poor turlygod!\" \"poor tom!\" that's something yet. edgar i nothing am."], ["'tis strange that they should so depart from home, and not send back my messenger.", "as i learned, the night before there was no purpose in them of this remove.", "lear hail to thee, noble master!", "ha! makest thou this shame thy pastime?", "no, my lord.", "ha, ha! look, he wears cruel garters. horses are tied by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by the loins, and men by the legs. when a man's overlusty at legs, then he wears wooden nether-stocks.", "kent what's he that hath so much thy place mistook to set thee here?", "it is both he and she: your son and daughter.", "no.", "yes.", "no, i say.", "i say \"yea.\""], ["no, no, they would not.", "yes, they have.", "by jupiter, i swear \"no.\"", "by juno, i swear \"ay.\"", "they durst not do 't. they could not, would not do 't. 'tis worse than murder to do upon respect such violent outrage. resolve me with all modest haste which way thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage, coming from us.", "my lord, when at their home i did commend your highness' letters to them. ere i was risen from the place that showed my duty kneeling, came there a reeking post, stewed in his haste, half breathless, panting forth from goneril his mistress salutations, delivered letters spite of intermission, which presently they read, on whose contents they summoned up their meiny, straight took horse, commanded me to follow and attend the leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks. and meeting here the other messenger, whose welcome i perceived had poisoned mine being the very fellow which of late displayed so saucily against your highness having more man than wit about me, drew. he raised the house with loud and coward cries. your son and daughter found this trespass worth the shame which here it suffers."], ["winter's not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way. fathers that wear rags do make their children blind. but fathers that bear bags shall see their children kind. fortune, that arrant whore, ne'er turns the key to th' poor. but for all this thou shalt have as many dolors for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.", "o, how this mother swells up toward my heart! hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow. thy element's below. where is this daughter?", "with the earl, sir, here within.", "follow me not. stay here.", "made you no more offense but what you speak of?", "none. how chance the king comes with so small a train?", "an thou hadst been set i' th' stocks for that question, thou'dst well deserved it.", "why, fool?", "we'll set thee to school to an ant to teach thee there's no laboring i' th' winter. all that follow their noses are led by their eyes but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty but can smell him that's stinking. let go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following it."], ["but the great one that goes up the hill, let him draw thee after. when a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again. i would have none but knaves follow it since a fool gives it. that sir which serves and seeks for gain, and follows but for form, will pack when it begins to rain and leave thee in the storm. but i will tarry. the fool will stay. and let the wise man fly. the knave turns fool that runs away; the fool, no knave, perdie.", "where learned you this, fool?", "not i' th' stocks, fool.", "deny to speak with me? they are sick? they are weary? they have traveled all the night? mere fetches, ay! the images of revolt and flying off. fetch me a better answer.", "my dear lord, you know the fiery quality of the duke, how unremoveable and fixed he is in his own course.", "vengeance, plague, death, confusion! \"fiery\"? what \"quality\"? why, gloucester, gloucester, i'd speak with the duke of cornwall and his wife.", "well, my good lord, i have informed them so."], ["\"informed them\"? dost thou understand me, man?", "ay, my good lord.", "the king would speak with cornwall. the dear father would with his daughter speak, commands, tends service. are they \"informed\" of this? my breath and blood! \"fiery\"? the \"fiery\" duke? tell the hot duke that lear no, but not yet. maybe he is not well. infirmity doth still neglect all office whereto our health is bound. we are not ourselves when nature, being oppressed, commands the mind to suffer with the body. i'll forbear, and am fallen out with my more headier will to take the indisposed and sickly fit for the sound man. kent death on my state! wherefore should he sit here? this act persuades me that this remotion of the duke and her is practice only. give me my servant forth. go tell the duke and 's wife i'd speak with them now, presently. bid them come forth and hear me, or at their chamber door i'll beat the drum till it cry sleep to death.", "i would have all well betwixt you.", "o me, my heart, my rising heart! but down."], ["cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she put 'em i' th' paste alive. she knapped 'em o' th' coxcombs with a stick and cried, \"down, wantons, down!\" 'twas her brother that, in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.", "good morrow to you both.", "hail to your grace.", "i am glad to see your highness.", "regan, i think you are. i know what reason i have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad, i would divorce me from thy mother's tomb, sepulchring an adultress. kent oh, are you free? some other time for that.", "belovd regan, thy sister's naught. o regan, she hath tied sharp-toothed unkindness, like a vulture, here. i can scarce speak to thee. thou'lt not believe with how depraved a quality o regan!"], ["i pray you, sir, take patience. i have hope you less know how to value her desert than she to scant her duty.", "say, how is that?", "i cannot think my sister in the least would fail her obligation. if, sir, perchance she have restrained the riots of your followers, 'tis on such ground and to such wholesome end as clears her from all blame.", "my curses on her!", "o sir, you are old. nature in you stands on the very verge of his confine. you should be ruled and led by some discretion that discerns your state better than you yourself. therefore i pray you that to our sister you do make return. say you have wronged her, sir.", "ask her forgiveness? do you but mark how this becomes the house? \"dear daughter, i confess that i am old. age is unnecessary. on my knees i beg that you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.\"", "good sir, no more. these are unsightly tricks. return you to my sister."], ["never, regan. she hath abated me of half my train, looked black upon me, struck me with her tongue, most serpentlike, upon the very heart. all the stored vengeances of heaven fall on her ingrateful top! strike her young bones, you taking airs, with lameness!", "fie, sir, fie!", "you nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames into her scornful eyes! infect her beauty, you fen-sucked fogs drawn by the powerful sun, to fall and blister!", "o the blessed gods! so will you wish on me when the rash mood is on.", "no, regan, thou shalt never have my curse. thy tender-hafted nature shall not give thee o'er to harshness. her eyes are fierce, but thine do comfort and not burn. 'tis not in thee to grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train, to bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes, and in conclusion to oppose the bolt against my coming in. thou better know'st the offices of nature, bond of childhood, effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude. thy half o' th' kingdom hast thou not forgot, wherein i thee endowed.", "good sir, to the purpose.", "who put my man i' th' stocks?"], ["what trumpet's that?", "i know 't my sister's. this approves her letter that she would soon be here. oswald is your lady come?", "this is a slave whose easy borrowed pride dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows. out, varlet, from my sight!", "what means your grace?", "who stocked my servant? regan, i have good hope thou didst not know on 't. who comes here? o heavens, if you do love old men, if your sweet sway allow obedience, if yourselves are old, make it your cause. send down, and take my part! goneril art not ashamed to look upon this beard? o regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?", "why not by th' hand, sir? how have i offended? all's not offense that indiscretion finds and dotage terms so.", "o sides, you are too tough. will you yet hold? how came my man i' th' stocks?"], ["i set him there, sir, but his own disorders deserved much less advancement.", "you! did you?", "i pray you, father, being weak, seem so. if till the expiration of your month, you will return and sojourn with my sister, dismissing half your train, come then to me. i am now from home, and out of that provision which shall be needful for your entertainment.", "return to her, and fifty men dismissed? no, rather i abjure all roofs, and choose to be a comrade with the wolf and owl to wage against the enmity o' th' air necessity's sharp pinch! return with her? why, the hot-blooded france that dowerless took our youngest born i could as well be brought to knee his throne, and, squirelike, pension beg to keep base life afoot. return with her? persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter to this detested groom. oswald", "at your choice, sir.", "now, i prithee, daughter, do not make me mad. i will not trouble thee, my child. farewell. we'll no more meet, no more see one another. but yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter or rather a disease that's in my flesh, which i must needs call mine. thou art a boil, a plague-sore or embossd carbuncle in my corrupted blood. but i'll not chide thee. let shame come when it will. i do not call it."], ["i do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot, nor tell tales of thee to high-judging jove. mend when thou canst. be better at thy leisure. i can be patient. i can stay with regan, i and my hundred knights.", "not altogether so, sir. i looked not for you yet, nor am provided for your fit welcome. give ear, sir, to my sister. for those that mingle reason with your passion must be content to think you old, and so but she knows what she does.", "is this well spoken now?", "i dare avouch it, sir. what, fifty followers? is it not well? what should you need of more yea, or so many sith that both charge and danger speak 'gainst so great a number? how, in one house, should many people under two commands hold amity? 'tis hard; almost impossible.", "why might not you, my lord, receive attendance from those that she calls servants, or from mine?", "why not, my lord? if then they chanced to slack you, we could control them. if you will come to me for now i spy a danger i entreat you to bring but five and twenty. to no more will i give place or notice.", "i gave you all", "and in good time you gave it."], ["made you my guardians, my depositaries, but kept a reservation to be followed with such a number. what, must i come to you with five and twenty, regan? said you so?", "and speak 't again, my lord. no more with me.", "those wicked creatures yet do look well favored when others are more wicked. not being the worst stands in some rank of praise. goneril i'll go with thee. thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty, and thou art twice her love.", "hear me, my lord. what need you five and twenty, ten, or five to follow in a house where twice so many have a command to tend you?", "what need one?", "o, reason not the need! our basest beggars are in the poorest thing superfluous. allow not nature more than nature needs, man's life's as cheap as beast's. thou art a lady. if only to go warm were gorgeous, why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st, which scarcely keeps thee warm. but, for true need you heavens, give me that patience, patience i need. you see me here, you gods, a poor old man, as full of grief as age, wretched in both. if it be you that stir these daughters' hearts against their father, fool me not so much to bear it tamely. touch me with noble anger. and let not women's weapons, water drops, stain my man's cheeks! no, you unnatural hags,"], ["i will have such revenges on you both that all the world shall i will do such things what they are yet i know not, but they shall be the terrors of the earth. you think i'll weep? no, i'll not weep.", "i have full cause of weeping, but this heart shall break into a hundred thousand flaws, or ere i'll weep. o fool, i shall go mad!", "let us withdraw. 'twill be a storm.", "this house is little. the old man and his people cannot be well bestowed.", "'tis his own blame. hath put himself from rest, and must needs taste his folly.", "for his particular i'll receive him gladly, but not one follower.", "so am i purposed. where is my lord of gloucester?", "followed the old man forth. he is returned.", "the king is in high rage."], ["whither is he going?", "he calls to horse, but will i know not whither.", "'tis best to give him way. he leads himself.", "gloucester my lord, entreat him by no means to stay.", "alack, the night comes on, and the high winds do sorely ruffle. for many miles about there's scarce a bush.", "o sir, to wilful men, the injuries that they themselves procure must be their schoolmasters. shut up your doors. he is attended with a desperate train. and what they may incense him to, being apt to have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.", "shut up your doors, my lord. 'tis a wild night. my regan counsels well. come out o' th' storm."], ["who's there, besides foul weather?", "one minded like the weather, most unquietly.", "i know you. where's the king?", "contending with the fretful elements. bids the winds blow the earth into the sea or swell the curld water 'bove the main, that things might change or cease. tears his white hair, which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage, catch in their fury and make nothing of. strives in his little world of man to outscorn the to-and-froconflicting wind and rain. this night wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch, the lion and the belly-pinchd wolf keep their fur dry unbonneted he runs, and bids what will take all.", "but who is with him?", "none but the fool, who labors to outjest his heart-struck injuries."], ["sir, i do know you, and dare upon the warrant of my note commend a dear thing to you. there is division, although as yet the face of it be covered with mutual cunning, 'twixt albany and cornwall, who have as who have not that their great stars throned and set high? servants, who seem no less, which are to france the spies and speculations intelligent of our state. what hath been seen, either in snuffs and packings of the dukes, or the hard rein which both of them hath borne against the old kind king, or something deeper, whereof perchance these are but furnishings but true it is. from france there comes a power into this scattered kingdom, who already, wise in our negligence, have secret feet in some of our best ports and are at point to show their open banner. now to you. if on my credit you dare build so far to make your speed to dover, you shall find some that will thank you, making just report of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow the king hath cause to plain. i am a gentleman of blood and breeding, and from some knowledge and assurance offer this office to you.", "i will talk further with you."], ["gentleman no, do not. for confirmation that i am much more than my outwall, open this purse and take what it contains. if you shall see cordelia as fear not but you shall show her this ring. and she will tell you who that fellow is that yet you do not know. fie on this storm! i will go seek the king.", "give me your hand. have you no more to say?", "few words, but to effect more than all yet: that when we have found the king in which your pain that way; i'll this he that first lights on him holla the other."], ["blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage, blow! you cataracts and hurricanoes, spout till you have drenched our steeples, drowned the cocks! you sulfurous and thought-executing fires, vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts, singe my white head! and thou, all-shaking thunder, smite flat the thick rotundity o' th' world, crack nature's molds, all germens spill at once that make ingrateful man!", "o nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than this rainwater out o' door. good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters blessing. here's a night pities neither wise man nor fool.", "rumble thy bellyful! spit, fire! spout, rain! nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters. i tax not you, you elements, with unkindness. i never gave you kingdom, called you children. you owe me no subscription. why then, let fall your horrible pleasure. here i stand, your slave a poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man. but yet i call you servile ministers, that will with two pernicious daughters joined your high engendered battles 'gainst a head so old and white as this. oh, ho! 'tis foul.", "he that has a house to put 's head in has a good headpiece. the codpiece that will house"], ["before the head has any the head and he shall louse. so beggars marry many. the man that makes his toe what he his heart should make shall of a corn cry woe, and turn his sleep to wake. for there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.", "no, i will be the pattern of all patience. i will say nothing.", "who's there?", "marry, here's grace and a codpiece that's a wise man and a fool.", "lear alas, sir, are you here? things that love night love not such nights as these. the wrathful skies gallow the very wanderers of the dark and make them keep their caves. snce i was man, such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder, such groans of roaring wind and rain i never remember to have heard. man's nature cannot carry th' affliction nor the fear.", "let the great gods that keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads find out their enemies now. tremble, thou wretch that hast within thee undivulgd crimes unwhipped of justice. hide thee, thou bloody hand, thou perjured, and thou simular man of virtue"], ["that art incestuous. caitiff, to pieces shake, that under covert and convenient seeming hast practiced on man's life. close pent-up guilts, rive your concealing continents and cry these dreadful summoners grace. i am a man more sinned against than sinning.", "alack, bareheaded? gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel. some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest. repose you there, while i to this hard house more harder than the stones whereof 'tis raised, which even but now, demanding after you, denied me to come in return, and force their scanted courtesy.", "my wits begin to turn. fool come on, my boy. how dost, my boy? art cold? i am cold myself. kent where is this straw, my fellow? the art of our necessities is strange that can make vile things precious. come, your hovel. poor fool and knave, i have one part in my heart that's sorry yet for thee.", "", "true, my good boy. come, bring us to this hovel."], ["this is a brave night to cool a courtesan. i'll speak a prophecy ere i go. when priests are more in word than matter, when brewers mar their malt with water, when nobles are their tailors' tutors, no heretics burned but wenches' suitors, when every case in law is right, no squire in debt nor no poor knight, when slanders do not live in tongues, nor cutpurses come not to throngs, when usurers tell their gold i' th' field, and bawds and whores do churches build then shall the realm of albion come to great confusion. then comes the time, who lives to see 't, that going shall be used with feet. this prophecy merlin shall make, for i live before his time."], ["alack, alack, edmund, i like not this unnatural dealing. when i desire their leave that i might pity him, they took from me the use of mine own house, charged me on pain of their perpetual displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor any way sustain him.", "most savage and unnatural!", "go to, say you nothing. there's a division betwixt the dukes. and a worse matter than that: i have received a letter this night. 'tis dangerous to be spoken. i have locked the letter in my closet. these injuries the king now bears will be revenged home. there's part of a power already footed. we must incline to the king. i will look him and privily relieve him. go you and maintain talk with the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived. if he ask for me, i am ill and gone to bed. though i die for it as no less is threatened me the king my old master must be relieved. there is some strange thing toward, edmund. pray you, be careful.", "this courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke instantly know, and of that letter too. this seems a fair deserving, and must draw me that which my father loses no less than all. the younger rises when the old doth fall."], ["here is the place, my lord. good my lord, enter. the tyranny of the open night's too rough for nature to endure.", "let me alone.", "good my lord, enter here.", "wilt break my heart?", "i had rather break mine own. good my lord, enter.", "thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm invades us to the skin. so 'tis to thee. but where the greater malady is fixed the lesser is scarce felt. thou'dst shun a bear, but if thy flight lay toward the raging sea thou'dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. when the mind's free, the body's delicate. the tempest in my mind doth from my senses take all feeling else save what beats there filial ingratitude. is it not as this mouth should tear this hand for lifting food to 't? but i will punish home. no, i will weep no more. in such a night to shut me out! pour on, i will endure. in such a night as this! o regan, goneril, your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all oh, that way madness lies. let me shun that. no more of that."], ["good my lord, enter here.", "prithee, go in thyself. seek thine own ease. this tempest will not give me leave to ponder on things would hurt me more. but i'll go in. fool in, boy. go first. you houseless poverty nay, get thee in. i'll pray, and then i'll sleep.", "poor naked wretches, whereso'er you are, that bide the pelting of this pitiless storm, how shall your houseless heads and unfed sides, your looped and windowed raggedness, defend you from seasons such as these? oh, i have ta'en too little care of this! take physic, pomp. expose thyself to feel what wretches feel, that thou mayst shake the superflux to them and show the heavens more just.", "fathom and half, fathom and half! poor tom!", "come not in here, nuncle. here's a spirit. help me, help me!", "give me thy hand. who's there?", "a spirit, a spirit. he says his name's poor tom.", "what art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw? come forth."], ["away! the foul fiend follows me! through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind. hum! go to thy cold bed and warm thee.", "didst thou give all to thy two daughters, and art thou come to this?", "who gives any thing to poor tom, whom the foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlipool, o'er bog and quagmire; that hath laid knives under his pillow and halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his porridge, made him proud of heart to ride on a bay trotting- horse over four-inched bridges to course his own shadow for a traitor? bless thy five wits. tom's a-cold. oh, do-de, do-de, do-de. bless thee from whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! do poor tom some charity, whom the foul fiend vexes. there could i have him now and there and there again and there.", "what, has his daughters brought him to this pass? couldst thou save nothing? wouldst thou give 'em all?", "nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.", "now all the plagues that in the pendulous air hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!", "he hath no daughters, sir."], ["death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature to such a lowness but his unkind daughters. is it the fashion that discarded fathers should have thus little mercy on their flesh? judicious punishment! 'twas this flesh begot those pelican daughters.", "pillicock sat on pillicock hill. alow, alow, loo, loo!", "this cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.", "take heed o' th' foul fiend. obey thy parents, keep thy word's justice, swear not, commit not with man's sworn spouse, set not thy sweet heart on proud array. tom's a- cold.", "what hast thou been?", "a servingman, proud in heart and mind, that curled my hair, wore gloves in my cap, served the lust of my mistress' heart and did the act of darkness with her, swore as many oaths as i spake words and broke them in the sweet face of heaven one that slept in the contriving of lust and waked to do it. wine loved i deeply, dice dearly, and in woman outparamoured the turk. false of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand hog in sloth, fox in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey. let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray thy poor heart to woman. keep thy foot out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy pen from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend. still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind, says, \"suum, mun, nonny.\" dauphin my boy, my boy, cessez. let him trot by."], ["why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies. is man no more than this? consider him well. thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume. ha! here's three on 's are sophisticated. thou art the thing itself. unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art. off, off, you lendings! come. unbutton here.", "prithee, nuncle, be contented. 'tis a naughty night to swim in. now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher's heart a small spark, all the rest on 's body cold. look, here comes a walking fire.", "this is the foul fiend flibbertigibbet. he begins at curfew and walks till the first cock. he gives the web and the pin, squints the eye and makes the harelip, mildews the white wheat and hurts the poor creature of earth. swithold footed thrice the 'old. he met the nightmare and her ninefold, bid her alight, and her troth plight. and aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!", "how fares your grace?", "gloucester what's he?", "who's there? what is 't you seek?"], ["what are you there? your names?", "poor tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the tadpole, the wall newt, and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages, eats cow dung for salads, swallows the old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to tithing and stocked, punished and imprisoned; who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his body, horse to ride and weapon to wear. but mice and rats and such small deer have been tom's food for seven long year. beware my follower. peace, smulkin. peace, thou fiend!", "lear what, hath your grace no better company?", "the prince of darkness is a gentleman. modo he's called, and mahu.", "lear our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vile that it doth hate what gets it.", "poor tom's a-cold.", "go in with me. my duty cannot suffer to obey in all your daughters' hard commands. though their injunction be to bar my doors and let this tyrannous night take hold upon you, yet have i ventured to come seek you out and bring you where both fire and food is ready.", "first let me talk with this philosopher. edgar what is the cause of thunder?"], ["lear good my lord, take his offer. go into the house.", "i'll talk a word with this same learnd theban. what is your study?", "how to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.", "let me ask you one word in private.", "gloucester importune him once more to go, my lord. his wits begin t' unsettle.", "canst thou blame him?", "his daughters seek his death. ah, that good kent he said it would be thus, poor banished man. thou say'st the king grows mad. i'll tell thee, friend, i am almost mad myself. i had a son, now outlawed from my blood. he sought my life, but lately, very late. i loved him, friend no father his son dearer. truth to tell thee,"], ["the grief hath crazed my wits. what a night's this! lear i do beseech your grace", "o, cry your mercy, sir. edgar noble philosopher, your company.", "tom's a-cold.", "in, fellow. there, into th' hovel. keep thee warm.", "come let's in all.", "this way, my lord.", "edgar with him! i will keep still with my philosopher.", "gloucester good my lord, soothe him. let him take the fellow.", "take him you on.", "edgar sirrah, come on. go along with us.", "come, good athenian.", "no words, no words. hush.", "child roland to the dark tower came, his word was still \"fie, foh, and fum, i smell the blood of a british man.\""], ["i will have my revenge ere i depart his house.", "how, my lord, i may be censured, that nature thus gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think of.", "i now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil disposition made him seek his death, but a provoking merit set awork by a reprovable badness in himself.", "how malicious is my fortune, that i must repent to be just! cornwall this is the letter which he spoke of, which approves him an intelligent party to the advantages of france. o heavens, that this treason were not, or not i the detector!", "go with me to the duchess.", "if the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.", "true or false, it hath made thee earl of gloucester. seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.", "if i find him comforting the king, it will stuff his suspicion more fully. cornwall i will persevere in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.", "i will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love."], ["here is better than the open air. take it thankfully. i will piece out the comfort with what addition i can. i will not be long from you.", "all the power of his wits have given way to his impatience. the gods reward your kindness!", "frateretto calls me and tells me nero is an angler in the lake of darkness. pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.", "prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a yeoman?", "a king, a king!", "no, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son, for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.", "to have a thousand with red burning spits come hissing in upon 'em!", "the foul fiend bites my back."], ["he's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse's health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.", "it shall be done. i will arraign them straight. edgar come, sit thou here, most learnd justicer. fool thou, sapient sir, sit here. now, you she-foxes", "look, where he stands and glares! want'st thou eyes at trial, madam?", "", "the foul fiend haunts poor tom in the voice of a nightingale. hoppedance cries in tom's belly for two white herring. croak not, black angel. i have no food for thee.", "lear how do you, sir? stand you not so amazed. will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?", "i'll see their trial first. bring in the evidence. edgar thou robd man of justice, take thy place. fool and thou, his yoke-fellow of equity, bench by his side. kent you are o' th' commission. sit you too.", "let us deal justly."], ["", "arraign her first. 'tis goneril. i here take my oath before this honorable assembly, she kicked the poor king her father.", "come hither, mistress. is your name goneril?", "she cannot deny it.", "cry you mercy, i took you for a joint-stool.", "and here's another, whose warped looks proclaim what store her heart is made on. stop her there! arms, arms, sword, fire, corruption in the place! false justicer, why hast thou let her 'scape?", "bless thy five wits.", "lear o pity! sir, where is the patience now, that thou so oft have boasted to retain?", "my tears begin to take his part so much, they'll mar my counterfeiting.", "the little dogs and all, tray, blanch, and sweetheart see, they bark at me.", "tom will throw his head at them. avaunt, you curs! tooth that poisons if it bite, mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,"], ["hound or spaniel, brach or him, bobtail tyke or trundle-tail tom will make them weep and wail. for with throwing thus my head, dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled. be thy mouth or black or white, do-de, de-de. cessez! come, march to wakes and fairs and market towns. poor tom, thy horn is dry.", "then let them anatomize regan. see what breeds about her heart. is there any cause in nature that makes these hard hearts? edgar you, sir, i entertain you for one of my hundred. only i do not like the fashion of your garments. you will say they are persian attire, but let them be changed.", "now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.", "make no noise, make no noise. draw the curtains so, so, so. we'll go to supper i' th' morning. so, so, so.", "and i'll go to bed at noon.", "kent come hither, friend. where is the king my master?", "here, sir, but trouble him not. his wits are gone.", "good friend, i prithee, take him in thy arms. i have o'erheard a plot of death upon him."], ["there is a litter ready. lay him in 't and drive towards dover, friend, where thou shalt meet both welcome and protection. take up thy master. if thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life, with thine and all that offer to defend him, stand in assurd loss. take up, take up, and follow me, that will to some provision give thee quick conduct.", "oppressd nature sleeps. this rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews, which, if convenience will not allow, stand in hard cure. fool come, help to bear thy master. thou must not stay behind.", "come, come, away.", "when we our betters see bearing our woes, we scarcely think our miseries our foes. who alone suffers, suffers most i' th' mind, leaving free things and happy shows behind. but then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip when grief hath mates and bearing fellowship. how light and portable my pain seems now when that which makes me bend makes the king bow. he childed as i fathered. tom, away! mark the high noises and thyself bewray when false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee, in thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee. what will hap more tonight, safe 'scape the king! lurk, lurk."], ["goneril post speedily to my lord your husband. show him this letter. the army of france is landed. seek out the traitor gloucester.", "hang him instantly.", "pluck out his eyes.", "leave him to my displeasure. edmund, keep you our sister company. the revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous father are not fit for your beholding. advise the duke where you are going, to a most festinate preparation. we are bound to the like. our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us. farewell, dear sister. edmund farewell, my lord of gloucester.", "how now? where's the king?", "my lord of gloucester hath conveyed him hence. some five or six and thirty of his knights, hot questrists after him, met him at gate, who with some other of the lord's dependants are gone with him towards dover, where they boast to have well-armd friends."], ["get horses for your mistress.", "farewell, sweet lord, and sister.", "edmund, farewell.", "go seek the traitor gloucester. pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.", "though well we may not pass upon his life without the form of justice, yet our power shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men may blame, but not control. who's there? the traitor?", "ingrateful fox, 'tis he.", "bind fast his corky arms.", "what mean your graces? good my friends, consider you are my guests. do me no foul play, friends.", "bind him, i say."], ["hard, hard. o filthy traitor!", "unmerciful lady as you are, i'm none.", "to this chair bind him. villain, thou shalt find", "by the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done to pluck me by the beard.", "so white, and such a traitor?", "naughty lady, these hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin will quicken and accuse thee. i am your host. with robbers' hands my hospitable favors you should not ruffle thus. what will you do?", "come, sir, what letters had you late from france?", "be simple-answered, for we know the truth.", "and what confederacy have you with the traitors late footed in the kingdom?", "to whose hands you have sent the lunatic king. speak.", "i have a letter guessingly set down, which came from one that's of a neutral heart, and not from one opposed.", "cunning."], ["and false.", "where hast thou sent the king?", "to dover.", "wherefore to dover? wast thou not charged at peril", "wherefore to dover? let him first answer that.", "i am tied to th' stake, and i must stand the course.", "wherefore to dover, sir?", "because i would not see thy crul nails pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister in his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs. the sea, with such a storm as his bare head in hell-black night endured, would have buoyed up, and quenched the stelld fires. yet poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain. if wolves had at thy gate howled that stern time, thou shouldst have said, \"good porter, turn the key,\" all cruls else subscribed. but i shall see the wingd vengeance overtake such children.", "\"see\" 't shalt thou never. fellows, hold the chair. upon these eyes of thine i'll set my foot.", "he that will think to live till he be old, give me some help!"], ["o cruel! o you gods!", "one side will mock another th' other too.", "if you see vengeance", "hold your hand, my lord! i have served you ever since i was a child. but better service have i never done you than now to bid you hold.", "how now, you dog?", "if you did wear a beard upon your chin, i'd shake it on this quarrel. what do you mean?", "my villein!", "nay then, come on, and take the chance of anger.", "give me thy sword. a peasant stand up thus? first servant", "oh, i am slain! my lord, you have one eye left to see some mischief on him. oh!", "lest it see more, prevent it. out, vile jelly!"], ["gloucester where is thy luster now?", "all dark and comfortless. where's my son edmund? edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature to quit this horrid act.", "out, treacherous villain! thou call'st on him that hates thee. it was he that made the overture of thy treasons to us, who is too good to pity thee.", "o my follies! then edgar was abused. kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!", "go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell his way to dover.", "cornwall how is 't, my lord? how look you?", "i have received a hurt. follow me, lady. turn out that eyeless villain. throw this slave upon the dunghill. regan, i bleed apace. untimely comes this hurt. give me your arm.", "i'll never care what wickedness i do, if this man come to good.", "if she live long, and in the end meet the old course of death, women will all turn monsters."], ["let's follow the old earl, and get the bedlam to lead him where he would. his roguish madness allows itself to any thing.", "go thou. i'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs to apply to his bleeding face. now heaven help him!"], ["yet better thus, and known to be contemned, than still contemned and flattered. to be worst, the lowest and most dejected thing of fortune stands still in esperance, lives not in fear. the lamentable change is from the best; the worst returns to laughter. welcome, then, thou unsubstantial air that i embrace! the wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst owes nothing to thy blasts.", "but who comes here? my father, poorly led? world, world, o world! but that thy strange mutations make us hate thee, life would not yield to age.", "gloucester o my good lord, i have been your tenant and your father's tenant these fourscore years.", "away, get thee away. good friend, be gone. thy comforts can do me no good at all. thee they may hurt.", "alack, sir, you cannot see your way.", "i have no way, and therefore want no eyes."], ["i stumbled when i saw. full oft 'tis seen, our means secure us and our mere defects prove our commodities. o dear son edgar, the food of thy abusd father's wrath, might i but live to see thee in my touch, i'd say i had eyes again!", "how now? who's there?", "o gods! who is 't can say \"i am at the worst\"? i am worse than e'er i was.", "gloucester 'tis poor mad tom.", "and worse i may be yet. the worst is not so long as we can say \"this is the worst.\"", "edgar fellow, where goest?", "is it a beggarman?", "madman and beggar too.", "he has some reason, else he could not beg. i' th' last night's storm i such a fellow saw, which made me think a man a worm. my son came then into my mind, and yet my mind was then scarce friends with him. i have heard more since. as flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods. they kill us for their sport."], ["how should this be? bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow, angering itself and others. bless thee, master!", "is that the naked fellow?", "ay, my lord.", "then prithee, get thee gone. if for my sake thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain i' th' way toward dover, do it for ancient love. and bring some covering for this naked soul, which i'll entreat to lead me.", "alack, sir, he is mad.", "'tis the time's plague when madmen lead the blind. do as i bid thee. or rather, do thy pleasure. above the rest, be gone.", "i'll bring him the best 'parel that i have, come on 't what will.", "sirrah, naked fellow", "poor tom's a-cold. i cannot daub it further.", "come hither, fellow.", "and yet i must. bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.", "know'st thou the way to dover?"], ["both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. poor tom hath been scared out of his good wits. bless thee, goodman's son, from the foul fiend! five fiends have been in poor tom at once: of lust, as obidicut; hobbididence, prince of dumbness; mahu, of stealing; modo, of murder; flibbertigibbet, of mopping and mowing, who since possesses chambermaids and waiting-women. so bless thee, master.", "edgar here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues have humbled to all strokes. that i am wretched makes thee the happier. heavens, deal so still. let the superfluous and lust-dieted man, that slaves your ordinance, that will not see because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly. so distribution should undo excess, and each man have enough. dost thou know dover?", "ay, master.", "there is a cliff, whose high and bending head looks fearfully in the confind deep. bring me but to the very brim of it, and i'll repair the misery thou dost bear with something rich about me. from that place i shall no leading need.", "give me thy arm. poor tom shall lead thee."], ["welcome, my lord. i marvel our mild husband not met us on the way.", "now, where's your master?", "madam, within but never man so changed. i told him of the army that was landed. he smiled at it. i told him you were coming. his answer was \"the worse.\" of gloucester's treachery and of the loyal service of his son, when i informed him, then he called me \"sot,\" and told me i had turned the wrong side out. what most he should dislike seems pleasant to him; what like, offensive.", "edmund then shall you go no further. it is the cowish terror of his spirit that dares not undertake. he'll not feel wrongs which tie him to an answer. our wishes on the way may prove effects. back, edmund, to my brother. hasten his musters and conduct his powers. i must change names at home, and give the distaff into my husband's hands. this trusty servant shall pass between us. ere long you are like to hear if you dare venture in your own behalf a mistress's command. wear this. spare speech. decline your head. this kiss, if it durst speak, would stretch thy spirits up into the air. edmund conceive, and fare thee well."], ["yours in the ranks of death.", "my most dear gloucester!", "oh, the difference of man and man! to thee a woman's services are due. my fool usurps my body.", "madam, here comes my lord.", "i have been worth the whistle.", "o goneril, you are not worth the dust which the rude wind blows in your face. i fear your disposition. that nature, which contemns its origin cannot be bordered certain in itself. she that herself will sliver and disbranch from her material sap perforce must wither and come to deadly use.", "no more. the text is foolish.", "wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile. filths savor but themselves. what have you done? tigers, not daughters, what have you performed? a father, and a gracious agd man, whose reverence even the head-lugged bear would lick, most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded."], ["could my good brother suffer you to do it a man, a prince by him so benefited? if that the heavens do not their visible spirits send quickly down to tame these vile offenses, it will come: humanity must perforce prey on itself like monsters of the deep.", "milk-livered man that bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning thine honor from thy suffering; that not know'st fools do those villains pity who are punished ere they have done their mischief. where's thy drum? france spreads his banners in our noiseless land, with plumd helm thy state begins to threat, whiles thou, a moral fool, sits still and cries, \"alack, why does he so?\"", "see thyself, devil! proper deformity shows not in the fiend so horrid as in woman.", "o vain fool!", "thou changd and self-covered thing, for shame! bemonster not thy feature. were 't my fitness to let these hands obey my blood, they are apt enough to dislocate and tear thy flesh and bones. howe'er thou art a fiend, a woman's shape doth shield thee.", "marry, your manhood, mew!"], ["what news?", "o my good lord, the duke of cornwall's dead, slain by his servant, going to put out the other eye of gloucester.", "gloucester's eyes?", "a servant that he bred, thrilled with remorse, opposed against the act, bending his sword to his great master; who thereat enraged flew on him and amongst them felled him dead but not without that harmful stroke, which since hath plucked him after.", "this shows you are above, you justicers, that these our nether crimes so speedily can venge! but oh, poor gloucester lost he his other eye?", "both, both, my lord. this letter, madam, craves a speedy answer. 'tis from your sister.", "one way i like this well. but being widow, and my gloucester with her, may all the building in my fancy pluck upon my hateful life. another way the news is not so tart. i'll read and answer."], ["where was his son when they did take his eyes?", "come with my lady hither.", "he is not here.", "no, my good lord. i met him back again.", "knows he the wickedness?", "ay, my good lord. 'twas he informed against him, and quit the house on purpose that their punishment might have the freer course.", "gloucester, i live to thank thee for the love thou showed'st the king, and to revenge thine eyes. come hither, friend. tell me what more thou know'st."], ["why the king of france is so suddenly gone back know you the reason?", "something he left imperfect in the state which, since his coming forth, is thought of; which imports to the kingdom so much fear and danger that his personal return was most required and necessary.", "who hath he left behind him general?", "the marshal of france, monsieur la far.", "did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration of grief?", "ay, sir. she took them, read them in my presence, and now and then an ample tear trilled down her delicate cheek. it seemed she was a queen over her passion, who, most rebel-like, sought to be king o'er her.", "o, then it moved her?", "not to a rage. patience and sorrow strove who should express her goodliest. you have seen sunshine and rain at once her smiles and tears were like a better way. those happy smilets that played on her ripe lip seemed not to know what guests were in her eyes, which parted thence as pearls from diamonds dropped. in brief, sorrow would be a rarity most beloved if all could so become it."], ["made she no verbal question?", "faith, once or twice she heaved the name of \"father\" pantingly forth as if it pressed her heart, cried, \"sisters, sisters! shame of ladies, sisters! kent, father, sisters! what, i' th' storm, i' th' night? let pity not be believed.\" there she shook the holy water from her heavenly eyes, and clamor moistened. then away she started to deal with grief alone.", "it is the stars, the stars above us, govern our conditions. else one self mate and mate could not beget such different issues. you spoke not with her since?", "no.", "was this before the king returned?", "no, since.", "well, sir, the poor distressd lear's i' th' town, who sometime in his better tune remembers what we are come about, and by no means will yield to see his daughter.", "why, good sir?", "a sovereign shame so elbows him. his own unkindness that stripped her from his benediction turned her to foreign casualties, gave her dear rights to his dog-hearted daughters. these things sting his mind so venomously that burning shame detains him from cordelia."], ["alack, poor gentleman!", "of albany's and cornwall's powers you heard not?", "'tis so. they are afoot.", "well, sir, i'll bring you to our master lear and leave you to attend him. some dear cause will in concealment wrap me up awhile. when i am known aright you shall not grieve lending me this acquaintance. i pray you, go along with me."], ["alack, 'tis he. why, he was met even now as mad as the vexed sea, singing aloud, crowned with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds, with burdocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers, darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow in our sustaining corn. a century send forth. search every acre in the high-grown field, and bring him to our eye.", "what can man's wisdom in the restoring his bereavd sense? he that helps him take all my outward worth.", "there is means, madam. our foster nurse of nature is repose, the which he lacks that to provoke in him are many simples operative, whose power will close the eye of anguish.", "all blessed secrets, all you unpublished virtues of the earth, spring with my tears. be aidant and remediate in the good man's distress. seek, seek for him, lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life that wants the means to lead it.", "news, madam. the british powers are marching hitherward."], ["'tis known before. our preparation stands in expectation of them. o dear father, it is thy business that i go about. therefore great france my mourning and importuned tears hath pitied. no blown ambition doth our arms incite, but love dear love! and our aged father's right. soon may i hear and see him."], ["but are my brother's powers set forth?", "ay, madam.", "himself in person there?", "madam, with much ado. your sister is the better soldier.", "lord edmund spake not with your lord at home?", "no, madam.", "what might import my sister's letter to him?", "i know not, lady.", "faith, he is posted hence on serious matter. it was great ignorance, gloucester's eyes being out, to let him live. where he arrives he moves all hearts against us. edmund i think is gone in pity of his misery to dispatch his nighted life; moreover to descry the strength o' th' enemy.", "i must needs after him, madam, with my letter.", "our troops set forth tomorrow. stay with us. the ways are dangerous."], ["i may not, madam. my lady charged my duty in this business.", "why should she write to edmund? might not you transport her purposes by word? belike some things i know not what. i'll love thee much. let me unseal the letter.", "madam, i had rather", "i know your lady does not love her husband. i am sure of that. and at her late being here she gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks to noble edmund. i know you are of her bosom.", "i, madam?", "i speak in understanding. y' are. i know 't. therefore i do advise you, take this note. my lord is dead. edmund and i have talked, and more convenient is he for my hand than for your lady's. you may gather more. if you do find him, pray you give him this. and when your mistress hears thus much from you, i pray desire her call her wisdom to her. so fare you well. if you do chance to hear of that blind traitor, preferment falls on him that cuts him off.", "would i could meet him, madam, i should show what party i do follow.", "fare thee well."], ["when shall we come to th' top of that same hill?", "you do climb up it now. look how we labor.", "methinks the ground is even.", "horrible steep. hark, do you hear the sea?", "no, truly.", "why then, your other senses grow imperfect by your eyes' anguish.", "so may it be indeed. methinks thy voice is altered, and thou speak'st in better phrase and matter than thou didst.", "you're much deceived. in nothing am i changed but in my garments.", "methinks you're better spoken.", "come on, sir. here's the place. stand still. how fearful and dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low! the crows and choughs that wing the midway air show scarce so gross as beetles. halfway down hangs one that gathers samphire dreadful trade! methinks he seems no bigger than his head. the fishermen that walk upon the beach appear like mice. and yon tall anchoring bark,"], ["diminished to her cock, her cock a buoy almost too small for sight. the murmuring surge that on th' unnumbered idle pebbles chafes cannot be heard so high. i'll look no more lest my brain turn and the deficient sight topple down headlong.", "set me where you stand.", "give me your hand. you are now within a foot of th' extreme verge. for all beneath the moon would i not leap upright.", "let go my hand. edgar here, friend, 's another purse, in it a jewel well worth a poor man's taking. fairies and gods prosper it with thee! go thou farther off. bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.", "now fare you well, good sir.", "with all my heart.", "why i do trifle thus with his despair is done to cure it.", "o you mighty gods, this world i do renounce, and in your sights shake patiently my great affliction off. if i could bear it longer and not fall to quarrel with your great opposeless wills, my snuff and loathd part of nature should burn itself out. if edgar live, o, bless him! now, fellow, fare thee well."], ["gone, sir. farewell. and yet i know not how conceit may rob the treasury of life when life itself yields to the theft. had he been where he thought, by this had thought been past. alive or dead? ho you, sir, friend! hear you, sir? speak. thus might he pass indeed. yet he revives. what are you, sir?", "away, and let me die.", "hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air, so many fathom down precipitating, thou'dst shivered like an egg. but thou dost breathe, hast heavy substance, bleed'st not, speak'st, art sound. ten masts at each make not the altitude which thou hast perpendicularly fell. thy life's a miracle. speak yet again.", "but have i fall'n, or no?", "from the dread summit of this chalky bourn. look up a-height. the shrill-gorged lark so far cannot be seen or heard. do but look up.", "alack, i have no eyes. is wretchedness deprived that benefit, to end itself by death? 'twas yet some comfort when misery could beguile the tyrant's rage and frustrate his proud will.", "give me your arm. up so. how is 't? feel you your legs? you stand.", "too well, too well."], ["this is above all strangeness. upon the crown o' th' cliff, what thing was that which parted from you?", "a poor unfortunate beggar.", "as i stood here below, methought his eyes were two full moons. he had a thousand noses, horns whelked and waved like the enragd sea. it was some fiend. therefore, thou happy father, think that the clearest gods, who make them honors of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.", "i do remember now. henceforth i'll bear affliction till it do cry out itself, \"enough, enough,\" and die. that thing you speak of, i took it for a man. often 'twould say, \"the fiend, the fiend!\" he led me to that place.", "bear free and patient thoughts.", "but who comes here? the safer sense will ne'er accommodate his master thus.", "no, they cannot touch me for coining. i am the king himself.", "o thou side-piercing sight!", "nature's above art in that respect. there's your press- money. that fellow handles his bow like a crowkeeper. draw me a clothier's yard. look, look, a mouse! peace,"], ["peace, this piece of toasted cheese will do 't. there's my gauntlet. i'll prove it on a giant. bring up the brown bills. o, well flown, bird. i' th' clout, i' th' clout. hewgh! give the word.", "sweet marjoram.", "pass.", "i know that voice.", "ha! goneril with a white beard? ha, regan? they flattered me like a dog and told me i had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones were there. to say \"ay\" and \"no\" to everything that i said \"ay\" and \"no\" to was no good divinity. when the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter, when the thunder would not peace at my bidding there i found 'em, there i smelt 'em out. go to, they are not men o' their words. they told me i was everything. 'tis a lie, i am not ague-proof.", "the trick of that voice i do well remember. is 't not the king?", "ay, every inch a king. when i do stare, see how the subject quakes. i pardon that man's life. what was thy cause? adultery? thou shalt not die. die for adultery? no. the wren goes to 't, and the small gilded fly does lecher in my sight. let copulation thrive, for gloucester's bastard son was kinder to his father than my daughters got 'tween the lawful sheets. to 't, luxury, pell-mell for i lack soldiers."], ["behold yond simpering dame, whose face between her forks presages snow, that minces virtue and does shake the head to hear of pleasure's name. the fitchew, nor the soiled horse, goes to 't with a more riotous appetite. down from the waist they are centaurs, though women all above. but to the girdle do the gods inherit; beneath is all the fiends'. there's hell, there's darkness, there's the sulfurous pit burning, scalding, stench, consumption! fie, fie, fie, pah, pah! give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination. there's money for thee.", "o, let me kiss that hand!", "let me wipe it first. it smells of mortality.", "o ruined piece of nature! this great world shall so wear out to naught. dost thou know me?", "i remember thine eyes well enough. dost thou squiny at me? no, do thy worst, blind cupid. i'll not love. read thou this challenge. mark but the penning of it.", "were all thy letters suns, i could not see one.", "i would not take this from report. it is, and my heart breaks at it.", "read.", "what, with the case of eyes?", "oh ho, are you there with me? no eyes in your head, nor no money in your purse? your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a light. yet you see how this world goes."], ["i see it feelingly.", "what, art mad? a man may see how this world goes with no eyes. look with thine ears. see how yon justice rails upon yon simple thief. hark in thine ear: change places and, handy-dandy, which is the justice, which is the thief? thou hast seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar?", "ay, sir.", "and the creature run from the cur? there thou mightst behold the great image of authority: a dog's obeyed in office. thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand. why dost thou lash that whore? strip thine own back. thou hotly lust'st to use her in that kind for which thou whipp'st her. the usurer hangs the cozener. through tattered clothes great vices do appear; robes and furred gowns hide all. plate sin with gold, and the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks. arm it in rags, a pigmy's straw does pierce it. none does offend none, i say, none. i'll able 'em. take that of me, my friend, who have the power to seal th' accuser's lips. get thee glass eyes, and like a scurvy politician seem to see the things thou dost not. now, now, now, now, pull off my boots. harder, harder. so.", "o matter and impertinency mixed! reason in madness!"], ["if thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes. i know thee well enough. thy name is gloucester. thou must be patient. we came crying hither. thou know'st the first time that we smell the air we wawl and cry. i will preach to thee. mark me.", "alack, alack the day!", "when we are born, we cry that we are come to this great stage of fools. this a good block. it were a delicate stratagem to shoe a troop of horse with felt. i'll put 't in proof. and when i have stol'n upon these sons-in-law, then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!", "oh, here he is. lay hand upon him. sir, your most dear daughter", "no rescue? what, a prisoner? i am even the natural fool of fortune. use me well. you shall have ransom. let me have surgeons. i am cut to th' brains.", "you shall have anything.", "no seconds? all myself? why, this would make a man a man of salt, to use his eyes for garden water-pots, ay, and laying autumn's dust.", "good sir"], ["i will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom. what, i will be jovial. come, come. i am a king, my masters, know you that?", "you are a royal one, and we obey you.", "then there's life in 't. come, an if you get it, you shall get it by running. sa, sa, sa, sa.", "a sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch, past speaking of in a king. thou hast a daughter who redeems nature from the general curse which twain have brought her to.", "hail, gentle sir.", "sir, speed you. what's your will?", "do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?", "most sure and vulgar. everyone hears that that can distinguish sound.", "but, by your favor, how near's the other army?", "near and on speedy foot. the main descry stands in the hourly thought.", "i thank you, sir. that's all."], ["though that the queen on special cause is here, her army is moved on.", "i thank you, sir.", "you ever gentle gods, take my breath from me. let not my worser spirit tempt me again to die before you please.", "well pray you, father.", "now, good sir, what are you?", "a most poor man made tame to fortune's blows, who by the art of known and feeling sorrows am pregnant to good pity. give me your hand, i'll lead you to some biding.", "hearty thanks. the bounty and the benison of heaven to boot and boot.", "a proclaimed prize! most happy! that eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh to raise my fortunes. thou old unhappy traitor, briefly thyself remember. the sword is out that must destroy thee.", "now let thy friendly hand put strength enough to 't."], ["wherefore, bold peasant, darest thou support a published traitor? hence, lest that th' infection of his fortune take like hold on thee. let go his arm.", "'chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'casion.", "let go, slave, or thou diest!", "good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk pass. an 'chud ha' bin zwaggered out of my life, 'twould not ha' bin zo long as 'tis by a vortnight. nay, come not near th' old man. keep out, che vor' ye, or i'se try whether your costard or my ballow be the harder. 'chill be plain with you.", "out, dunghill!", "'chill pick your teeth, zir. come, no matter vor your foins.", "slave, thou hast slain me. villain, take my purse. if ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body. and give the letters which thou find'st about me to edmund, earl of gloucester. seek him out upon the british party. o untimely death!", "i know thee well a serviceable villain, as duteous to the vices of thy mistress as badness would desire.", "what, is he dead?"], ["sit you down, father. rest you. let's see these pockets. the letters that he speaks of may be my friends. he's dead. i am only sorry he had no other death's-man. let us see. oswald leave, gentle wax, and, manners, blame us not. to know our enemies' minds, we rip their hearts. their papers is more lawful. \"let our reciprocal vows be remembered. you have many opportunities to cut him off. if your will want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. there is nothing done if he return the conqueror. then am i the prisoner and his bed my gaol, from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the place for your labor. your wife, so i would say affectionate servant, and for you her own for venture, goneril.\" o indistinguished space of woman's will! a plot upon her virtuous husband's life, and the exchange my brother! here in the sands thee i'll rake up, the post unsanctified of murderous lechers. and in the mature time with this ungracious paper strike the sight of the death-practiced duke. for him 'tis well that of thy death and business i can tell.", "the king is mad. how stiff is my vile sense, that i stand up and have ingenious feeling of my huge sorrows. better i were distract so should my thoughts be severed from my griefs, and woes by wrong imaginations lose the knowledge of themselves."], ["give me your hand. far off methinks i hear the beaten drum. come, father, i'll bestow you with a friend."], ["o thou good kent, how shall i live and work to match thy goodness? my life will be too short, and every measure fail me.", "to be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid. all my reports go with the modest truth, nor more, nor clipped, but so.", "be better suited. these weeds are memories of those worser hours. i prithee, put them off.", "pardon, dear madam. yet to be known shortens my made intent. my boon i make it that you know me not till time and i think meet.", "then be 't so, my good lord. how does the king?", "madam, sleeps still.", "o you kind gods, cure this great breach in his abusd nature, th' untuned and jarring senses, o, wind up, of this child-changd father!", "so please your majesty that we may wake the king? he hath slept long."], ["be governed by your knowledge, and proceed i' th' sway of your own will. is he arrayed?", "ay, madam. in the heaviness of his sleep we put fresh garments on him.", "be by, good madam, when we do awake him. i doubt not of his temperance.", "very well.", "please you, draw near. louder the music there!", "lear o my dear father, restoration hang thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss repair those violent harms that my two sisters have in thy reverence made!", "kind and dear princess!", "had you not been their father, these white flakes did challenge pity of them. was this a face to be opposed against the warring winds? to stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder in the most terrible and nimble stroke of quick cross lightning? to watch poor perdu! with this thin helm? mine enemy's meanest dog, though he had bit me, should have stood that night against my fire. and wast thou fain, poor father, to hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn in short and musty straw? alack, alack! 'tis wonder that thy life and wits at once had not concluded all. he wakes. speak to him."], ["madam, do you. 'tis fittest.", "how does my royal lord? how fares your majesty?", "you do me wrong to take me out o' th' grave. thou art a soul in bliss, but i am bound upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears do scald like molten lead.", "sir, do you know me?", "you are a spirit, i know. where did you die?", "doctor still, still far wide!", "he's scarce awake. let him alone awhile.", "where have i been? where am i? fair daylight? i am mightily abused. i should ev'n die with pity to see another thus. i know not what to say. i will not swear these are my hands. let's see. i feel this pinprick. would i were assured of my condition.", "o, look upon me, sir, and hold your hands in benediction o'er me. no, sir, you must not kneel.", "pray, do not mock me. i am a very foolish fond old man, fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less. and to deal plainly i fear i am not in my perfect mind. methinks i should know you, and know this man."], ["yet i am doubtful, for i am mainly ignorant what place this is, and all the skill i have remembers not these garments. nor i know not where i did lodge last night. do not laugh at me, for as i am a man, i think this lady to be my child cordelia.", "and so i am, i am.", "be your tears wet? yes, faith. i pray, weep not. if you have poison for me, i will drink it. i know you do not love me, for your sisters have, as i do remember, done me wrong. you have some cause; they have not.", "no cause, no cause.", "am i in france?", "in your own kingdom, sir.", "do not abuse me.", "be comforted, good madam. the great rage, you see, is killed in him. and yet it is danger to make him even o'er the time he has lost. desire him to go in. trouble him no more till further settling.", "will 't please your highness walk?", "you must bear with me. pray you now, forget and forgive. i am old and foolish."], ["holds it true, sir, that the duke of cornwall was so slain?", "most certain, sir.", "who is conductor of his people?", "as 'tis said, the bastard son of gloucester.", "they say edgar, his banished son, is with the earl of kent in germany.", "report is changeable. tis time to look about. the powers of the kingdom approach apace.", "the arbitrament is like to be bloody. fare you well, sir.", "my point and period will be throughly wrought, or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought."], ["know of the duke if his last purpose hold, or whether since he is advised by aught to change the course. he's full of alteration and self-reproving. bring his constant pleasure.", "our sister's man is certainly miscarried.", "'tis to be doubted, madam.", "now, sweet lord, you know the goodness i intend upon you. tell me but truly but then speak the truth do you not love my sister?", "in honored love.", "but have you never found my brother's way to the forfended place?", "that thought abuses you.", "i am doubtful that you have been conjunct and bosomed with her as far as we call hers.", "no, by mine honor, madam."], ["i never shall endure her. dear my lord, be not familiar with her.", "fear me not. she and the duke her husband!", "i had rather lose the battle than that sister should loosen him and me.", "our very loving sister, well bemet. sir, this i hear: the king is come to his daughter, with others whom the rigor of our state forced to cry out. where i could not be honest i never yet was valiant. for this business, it touches us as france invades our land, not bolds the king, with others whom i fear most just and heavy causes make oppose.", "sir, you speak nobly.", "why is this reasoned?", "combine together 'gainst the enemy, for these domestic and particular broils are not the question here.", "let's then determine with the ancient of war on our proceedings.", "i shall attend you presently at your tent.", "sister, you'll go with us?"], ["no.", "'tis most convenient. pray you, go with us.", "oh ho, i know the riddle. i will go.", "albany if e'er your grace had speech with man so poor, hear me one word.", "edmund regan goneril i'll overtake you.", "speak.", "albany before you fight the battle, ope this letter. if you have victory, let the trumpet sound for him that brought it. wretched though i seem, i can produce a champion that will prove what is avouchd there. if you miscarry, your business of the world hath so an end, and machination ceases. fortune love you.", "stay till i have read the letter.", "i was forbid it. when time shall serve, let but the herald cry, and i'll appear again.", "why, fare thee well. i will o'erlook thy paper."], ["the enemy's in view. draw up your powers. albany here is the guess of their true strength and forces by diligent discovery, but your haste is now urged on you.", "we will greet the time.", "to both these sisters have i sworn my love, each jealous of the other as the stung are of the adder. which of them shall i take? both? one? or neither? neither can be enjoyed if both remain alive. to take the widow exasperates, makes mad her sister goneril, and hardly shall i carry out my side, her husband being alive. now, then, we'll use his countenance for the battle, which being done, let her who would be rid of him devise his speedy taking off. as for the mercy which he intends to lear and to cordelia, the battle done and they within our power, shall never see his pardon, for my state stands on me to defend, not to debate."], ["here, father, take the shadow of this tree for your good host. pray that the right may thrive. if ever i return to you again, i'll bring you comfort.", "grace go with you, sir.", "away, old man. give me thy hand. away! king lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en. give me thy hand. come on.", "no further, sir. a man may rot even here.", "what, in ill thoughts again? men must endure their going hence even as their coming hither. ripeness is all. come on.", "and that's true too."], ["some officers take them away. good guard until their greater pleasures first be known that are to censure them.", "lear we are not the first who with best meaning have incurred the worst. for thee, oppressd king, i am cast down. myself could else outfrown false fortune's frown. shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?", "no, no, no, no! come, let's away to prison. we two alone will sing like birds i' th' cage. when thou dost ask me blessing, i'll kneel down and ask of thee forgiveness. so we'll live, and pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh at gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues talk of court news, and we'll talk with them too who loses and who wins, who's in, who's out and take upon 's the mystery of things as if we were god's spies. and we'll wear out in a walled prison packs and sects of great ones that ebb and flow by the moon.", "take them away.", "upon such sacrifices, my cordelia, the gods themselves throw incense. have i caught thee? he that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven and fire us hence like foxes. wipe thine eyes."], ["the good years shall devour them, flesh and fell, ere they shall make us weep. we'll see 'em starve first. come.", "come hither, captain. hark. first captain take thou this note. go follow them to prison. one step i have advanced thee. if thou dost as this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way to noble fortunes. know thou this: that men are as the time is. to be tender-minded does not become a sword. thy great employment will not bear question. either say thou'lt do 't, or thrive by other means.", "i'll do 't, my lord.", "about it, and write \"happy\" when thou'st done. mark, i say, instantly, and carry it so as i have set it down.", "i cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats. if it be man's work, i'll do 't.", "edmund sir, you have shown today your valiant strain, and fortune led you well. you have the captives that were the opposites of this day's strife."], ["i do require them of you, so to use them as we shall find their merits and our safety may equally determine.", "sir, i thought it fit to send the old and miserable king to some retention and appointed guard whose age has charms in it, whose title more to pluck the common bosom on his side, an turn our impressed lances in our eyes which do command them. with him i sent the queen, my reason all the same, and they are ready tomorrow or at further space t' appear where you shall hold your session. at this time we sweat and bleed. the friend hath lost his friend, and the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed by those that feel their sharpness. the question of cordelia and her father requires a fitter place.", "i hold you but a subject of this war, not as a brother.", "that's as we list to grace him. methinks our pleasure might have been demanded ere you had spoke so far. he led our powers, bore the commission of my place and person the which immediacy may well stand up and call itself your brother.", "not so hot. in his own grace he doth exalt himself more than in your addition.", "in my rights, by me invested, he compeers the best."], ["that were the most if he should husband you.", "jesters do oft prove prophets.", "holla, holla! that eye that told you so looked but asquint.", "lady, i am not well, else i should answer from a full-flowing stomach. edmund general, take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony. dispose of them, of me. the walls is thine. witness the world that i create thee here my lord and master.", "mean you to enjoy him then?", "the let-alone lies not in your good will.", "nor in thine, lord.", "half-blooded fellow, yes.", "edmund let the drum strike and prove my title thine.", "stay yet. hear reason. edmund, i arrest thee on capital treason, and in thine attaint this gilded serpent. goneril regan for your claim, fair sister, i bar it in the interest of my wife. 'tis she is subcontracted to this lord. and i, her husband, contradict your banns. if you will marry, make your loves to me, my lady is bespoke."], ["an interlude!", "thou art armed, gloucester. let the trumpet sound. if none appear to prove upon thy person thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons, there is my pledge. i'll make it on thy heart, ere i taste bread, thou art in nothing less than i have here proclaimed thee.", "sick, oh, sick!", "if not, i'll ne'er trust medicine.", "there's my exchange. what in the world he is that names me traitor, villainlike he lies. call by thy trumpet. he that dares approach, on him on you, who not? i will maintain my truth and honor firmly.", "a herald, ho!", "a herald, ho, a herald!", "edmund trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers, all levied in my name, have in my name took their discharge.", "my sickness grows upon me.", "she is not well. convey her to my tent."], ["come hither, herald. let the trumpet sound, and read out this. herald", "sound, trumpet!", "\"if any man of quality or degree within the lists of the army will maintain upon edmund, supposed earl of gloucester, that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the trumpet. he is bold in his defense.\"", "sound!", "again!", "again!", "herald ask him his purposes, why he appears upon this call o' th' trumpet.", "what are you? your name, your quality, and why you answer this present summons?"], ["o, know, my name is lost. by treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit. yet am i noble as the adversary i come to cope withal.", "which is that adversary?", "what's he that speaks for edmund, earl of gloucester?", "himself. what sayst thou to him?", "draw thy sword, that if my speech offend a noble heart thy arm may do thee justice. here is mine. behold: it is the privilege of mine honors, my oath, and my profession. i protest maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence, despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune, thy valor and thy heart thou art a traitor, false to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father, conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince, and from th' extremest upward of thy head to the descent and dust below thy foot a most toad-spotted traitor. say thou \"no,\" this sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent to prove upon thy heart, whereto i speak, thou liest.", "in wisdom i should ask thy name. but since thy outside looks so fair and warlike, and that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes, what safe and nicely i might well delay by rule of knighthood, i disdain and spurn. back do i toss these treasons to thy head, with the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart"], ["which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise, this sword of mine shall give them instant way, where they shall rest for ever. trumpets, speak!", "save him, save him!", "this is practice, gloucester. by th' law of arms thou wast not bound to answer an unknown opposite. thou art not vanquished, but cozened and beguiled.", "shut your mouth, dame, or with this paper shall i stop it. hold, sir, edmund thou worse than any name, read thine own evil. goneril nay, no tearing, lady. i perceive you know it.", "say, if i do? the laws are mine, not thine. who can arraign me for 't?", "most monstrous, oh! edmund know'st thou this paper?", "ask me not what i know.", "go after her. she's desperate. govern her."], ["what you have charged me with, that have i done and more, much more. the time will bring it out. 'tis past, and so am i. edgar but what art thou that hast this fortune on me? if thou'rt noble, i do forgive thee.", "let's exchange charity. i am no less in blood than thou art, edmund. if more, the more thou'st wronged me. my name is edgar, and thy father's son. the gods are just, and of our pleasant vices make instruments to plague us. the dark and vicious place where thee he got cost him his eyes.", "thou'st spoken right. 'tis true. the wheel is come full circle. i am here.", "methought thy very gait did prophesy a royal nobleness. i must embrace thee. let sorrow split my heart if ever i did hate thee or thy father.", "worthy prince, i know 't.", "where have you hid yourself? how have you known the miseries of your father?", "by nursing them, my lord. list a brief tale, and when 'tis told, oh, that my heart would burst! the bloody proclamation to escape, that followed me so near o our lives' sweetness,"], ["that we the pain of death would hourly die rather than die at once! taught me to shift into a madman's rags, t' assume a semblance that very dogs disdained. and in this habit met i my father with his bleeding rings, their precious stones new lost, became his guide, led him, begged for him, saved him from despair. never o fault! revealed myself unto him until some half-hour past, when i was armed. not sure, though hoping of this good success, i asked his blessing, and from first to last told him my pilgrimage. but his flawed heart alack, too weak the conflict to support 'twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief, burst smilingly.", "this speech of yours hath moved me, and shall perchance do good. but speak you on. you look as you had something more to say.", "if there be more, more woeful, hold it in. for i am almost ready to dissolve, hearing of this.", "this would have seemed a period to such as love not sorrow, but another to amplify too much would make much more and top extremity. whilst i was big in clamor came there in a man who, having seen me in my worst estate, shunned my abhorred society, but then, finding who 'twas that so endured, with his strong arms he fastened on my neck, and bellowed out as he'd burst heaven, threw him on my father, told the most piteous tale of lear and him that ever ear received which in recounting"], ["his grief grew puissant and the strings of life began to crack. twice then the trumpets sounded, and there i left him tranced.", "but who was this?", "kent, sir, the banished kent, who in disguise followed his enemy king and did him service improper for a slave.", "help, help, o, help!", "what kind of help?", "speak, man.", "what means that bloody knife?", "'tis hot, it smokes. it came even from the heart of oh, she's dead!", "who dead? speak, man.", "your lady, sir, your lady. and her sister by her is poisoned. she confesses it.", "i was contracted to them both. all three now marry in an instant.", "here comes kent."], ["produce their bodies, be they alive or dead. this judgment of the heavens that makes us tremble touches us not with pity.", "oh, is this he? the time will not allow the compliment which very manners urges.", "i am come to bid my king and master aye good night. is he not here?", "great thing of us forgot! speak, edmund, where's the king? and where's cordelia?", "seest thou this object, kent?", "alack, why thus?", "yet edmund was beloved. the one the other poisoned for my sake, and after slew herself.", "even so. cover their faces.", "i pant for life. some good i mean to do despite of mine own nature. quickly send be brief in it to th' castle, for my writ is on the life of lear and on cordelia. nay, send in time!"], ["run, run, o, run!", "to who, my lord? who hath the office? send thy token of reprieve.", "well thought on. take my sword. the captain give it the captain.", "haste thee for thy life.", "he hath commission from thy wife and me to hang cordelia in the prison and to lay the blame upon her own despair, that she fordid herself.", "the gods defend her! hear him hence awhile.", "howl, howl, howl, howl! oh, you are men of stones. had i your tongues and eyes, i'd use them so that heaven's vault should crack. she's gone forever. i know when one is dead and when one lives. she's dead as earth. lend me a looking-glass. if that her breath will mist or stain the stone, why then, she lives.", "is this the promised end?", "or image of that horror?"], ["fall and cease.", "this feather stirs. she lives. if it be so, it is a chance which does redeem all sorrows that ever i have felt.", "o my good master!", "prithee, away.", "'tis noble kent, your friend.", "a plague upon you, murderers, traitors all! i might have saved her. now she's gone for ever. cordelia, cordelia, stay a little. ha? what is 't thou say'st? her voice was ever soft, gentle and low, an excellent thing in woman. i killed the slave that was a-hanging thee.", "'tis true, my lords, he did.", "did i not, fellow? i have seen the day with my good biting falchion i would have made them skip. i am old now, and these same crosses spoil me. kent who are you? mine eyes are not o' th' best, i'll tell you straight.", "if fortune brag of two she loved and hated, one of them we behold.", "this a dull sight. are you not kent?", "the same. your servant kent. where is your servant caius?"], ["he's a good fellow, i can tell you that. he'll strike, and quickly too. he's dead and rotten.", "no, my good lord. i am the very man", "i'll see that straight.", "that from your first of difference and decay have followed your sad steps.", "you're welcome hither.", "nor no man else. all's cheerless, dark, and deadly. your eldest daughters have fordone themselves, and desperately are dead.", "ay, so i think.", "he knows not what he says, and vain it is that we present us to him.", "very bootless.", "edmund is dead, my lord.", "that's but a trifle here. you lords and noble friends, know our intent. what comfort to this great decay may come shall be applied. for us, we will resign during the life of this old majesty to him our absolute power."], ["edgar kent you, to your rights with boot, and such addition as your honors have more than merited. all friends shall taste the wages of their virtue, and all foes the cup of their deservings. o, see, see!", "and my poor fool is hanged. no, no, no life? why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life, and thou no breath at all? oh, thou'lt come no more, never, never, never, never, never. pray you, undo this button. thank you, sir. do you see this? look on her. look, her lips. look there, look there. o, o, o, o.", "he faints! my lord, my lord!", "break, heart. i prithee, break!", "lear look up, my lord.", "vex not his ghost. o, let him pass. he hates him that would upon the rack of this tough world stretch him out longer.", "oh, he is gone indeed.", "the wonder is he hath endured so long. he but usurped his life.", "bear them from hence. our present business is to general woe. kent edgar friends of my soul, you twain rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain."], ["i have a journey, sir, shortly to go. my master calls me. i must not say no.", "the weight of this sad time we must obey. speak what we feel, not what we ought to say. the oldest hath borne most. we that are young shall never see so much, nor live so long."]], [["when shall we three meet again? in thunder, lightning, or in rain?", "when the hurly-burly's done, when the battle's lost and won.", "that will be ere the set of sun.", "where the place?", "upon the heath.", "there to meet with macbeth.", "i come, graymalkin!", "paddock calls.", "anon.", "fair is foul, and foul is fair hover through the fog and filthy air."], ["what bloody man is that? he can report, as seemeth by his plight, of the revolt the newest state.", "this is the sergeant who like a good and hardy soldier fought 'gainst my captivity. hail, brave friend! say to the king the knowledge of the broil as thou didst leave it.", "doubtful it stood, as two spent swimmers that do cling together and choke their art. the merciless macdonwald worthy to be a rebel, for to that the multiplying villanies of nature do swarm upon him from the western isles of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied, and fortune, on his damnd quarrel smiling, showed like a rebel's whore. but all's too weak, for brave macbeth well he deserves that name disdaining fortune, with his brandished steel, which smoked with bloody execution, like valor's minion carved out his passage till he faced the slave; which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him, till he unseamed him from the nave to th' chops, and fixed his head upon our battlements.", "o valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!"], ["as whence the sun 'gins his reflection shipwracking storms and direful thunders break, so from that spring whence comfort seemed to come discomfort swells. mark, king of scotland, mark: no sooner justice had, with valor armed, compelled these skipping kerns to trust their heels, but the norweyan lord, surveying vantage, with furbished arms and new supplies of men, began a fresh assault.", "dismayed not this our captains, macbeth and banquo?", "yes, as sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion. if i say sooth, i must report they were as cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe. except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, or memorize another golgotha, i cannot tell but i am faint, my gashes cry for help.", "so well thy words become thee as thy wounds; they smack of honor both. go get him surgeons.", "who comes here?", "the worthy thane of ross.", "what a haste looks through his eyes! so should he look that seems to speak things strange."], ["god save the king.", "whence cam'st thou, worthy thane?", "from fife, great king, where the norweyan banners flout the sky and fan our people cold. norway himself, with terrible numbers, assisted by that most disloyal traitor, the thane of cawdor, began a dismal conflict, till that bellona's bridegroom, lapped in proof, confronted him with self-comparisons, point against point, rebellious arm 'gainst arm, curbing his lavish spirit; and to conclude, the victory fell on us.", "great happiness!", "that now sweno, the norways' king, craves composition. nor would we deign him burial of his men till he disbursed at saint colme's inch ten thousand dollars to our general use.", "no more that thane of cawdor shall deceive our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death, and with his former title greet macbeth.", "i'll see it done.", "what he hath lost, noble macbeth hath won."], ["where hast thou been, sister?", "killing swine.", "sister, where thou?", "a sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap, and munched, and munched, and munched. \"give me,\" quoth i. \"aroint thee, witch!\" the rump-fed runnion cries. her husband's to aleppo gone, master o' th' ; but in a sieve i'll thither sail, and like a rat without a tail, i'll do, i'll do, and i'll do.", "i'll give thee a wind.", "thou 'rt kind.", "and i another.", "i myself have all the other, and the very ports they blow, all the quarters that they know i' th' shipman's card. i'll drain him dry as hay. sleep shall neither night nor day hang upon his penthouse lid. he shall live a man forbid. weary sev'nnights nine times nine shall he dwindle, peak and pine."], ["though his bark cannot be lost, yet it shall be tempest-tossed. look what i have.", "show me, show me.", "here i have a pilot's thumb, wrecked as homeward he did come.", "a drum, a drum! macbeth doth come.", "the weird sisters, hand in hand, posters of the sea and land, thus do go about, about, thrice to thine and thrice to mine and thrice again, to make up nine. peace! the charm's wound up.", "so foul and fair a day i have not seen.", "how far is 't called to forres? what are these so withered and so wild in their attire, that look not like th' inhabitants o' th' earth, and yet are on 't? live you? or are you aught that man may question? you seem to understand me, by each at once her choppy finger laying upon her skinny lips. you should be women, and yet your beards forbid me to interpret that you are so."], ["speak, if you can: what are you?", "all hail, macbeth! hail to thee, thane of glamis!", "all hail, macbeth! hail to thee, thane of cawdor!", "all hail, macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!", "good sir, why do you start and seem to fear things that do sound so fair? witches i' th' name of truth, are ye fantastical, or that indeed which outwardly ye show? my noble partner you greet with present grace and great prediction of noble having and of royal hope, that he seems rapt withal. to me you speak not. if you can look into the seeds of time and say which grain will grow and which will not, speak, then, to me, who neither beg nor fear your favors nor your hate.", "hail!", "hail!", "hail!", "lesser than macbeth and greater.", "not so happy, yet much happier.", "thou shalt get kings, though thou be none. so all hail, macbeth and banquo!"], ["banquo and macbeth, all hail!", "stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more. by sinel's death i know i am thane of glamis. but how of cawdor? the thane of cawdor lives, a prosperous gentleman, and to be king stands not within the prospect of belief, no more than to be cawdor. say from whence you owe this strange intelligence, or why upon this blasted heath you stop our way with such prophetic greeting. speak, i charge you.", "the earth hath bubbles, as the water has, and these are of them. whither are they vanished?", "into the air, and what seemed corporal melted, as breath into the wind. would they had stayed.", "were such things here as we do speak about? or have we eaten on the insane root that takes the reason prisoner?", "your children shall be kings.", "you shall be king.", "and thane of cawdor too: went it not so?", "to the selfsame tune and words. who's here?"], ["the king hath happily received, macbeth, the news of thy success, and when he reads thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, his wonders and his praises do contend which should be thine or his. silenced with that, in viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day, he finds thee in the stout norweyan ranks, nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, strange images of death. as thick as tale can post with post, and every one did bear thy praises in his kingdom's great defense, and poured them down before him.", "we are sent to give thee from our royal master thanks, only to herald thee into his sight, not pay thee.", "and, for an earnest of a greater honor, he bade me, from him, call thee thane of cawdor: in which addition, hail, most worthy thane, for it is thine.", "what, can the devil speak true?", "the thane of cawdor lives. why do you dress me in borrowed robes?", "who was the thane lives yet, but under heavy judgment bears that life which he deserves to lose. whether he was combined with those of norway, or did line the rebel with hidden help and vantage, or that with both he labored in his country's wrack, i know not; but treasons capital, confessed and proved, have overthrown him."], ["glamis, and thane of cawdor! the greatest is behind. ross angus thanks for your pains. banquo do you not hope your children shall be kings, when those that gave the thane of cawdor to me promised no less to them?", "that, trusted home, might yet enkindle you unto the crown, besides the thane of cawdor. but 'tis strange. and oftentimes, to win us to our harm, the instruments of darkness tell us truths, win us with honest trifles, to betray 's in deepest consequence. ross angus cousins, a word, i pray you.", ") two truths are told, as happy prologues to the swelling act of the imperial theme. ross angus i thank you, gentlemen. this supernatural soliciting cannot be ill, cannot be good. if ill, why hath it given me earnest of success, commencing in a truth? i am thane of cawdor. if good, why do i yield to that suggestion whose horrid image doth unfix my hair and make my seated heart knock at my ribs, against the use of nature? present fears are less than horrible imaginings."], ["my thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, shakes so my single state of man that function is smothered in surmise, and nothing is but what is not.", "look how our partner's rapt.", "if chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me without my stir.", "new honors come upon him, like our strange garments, cleave not to their mold but with the aid of use.", "come what come may, time and the hour runs through the roughest day.", "worthy macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.", "give me your favor. my dull brain was wrought with things forgotten. kind gentlemen, your pains are registered where every day i turn the leaf to read them. let us toward the king. banquo think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time, the interim having weighed it, let us speak our free hearts each to other.", "very gladly.", "till then, enough. ross angus come, friends."], ["is execution done on cawdor? are not those in commission yet returned?", "my liege, they are not yet come back. but i have spoke with one that saw him die, who did report that very frankly he confessed his treasons, implored your highness' pardon, and set forth a deep repentance. nothing in his life became him like the leaving it. he died as one that had been studied in his death to throw away the dearest thing he owed as 'twere a careless trifle.", "there's no art to find the mind's construction in the face. he was a gentleman on whom i built an absolute trust.", "macbeth o worthiest cousin, the sin of my ingratitude even now was heavy on me. thou art so far before that swiftest wing of recompense is slow to overtake thee. would thou hadst less deserved, that the proportion both of thanks and payment might have been mine! only i have left to say, more is thy due than more than all can pay."], ["the service and the loyalty i owe in doing it pays itself. your highness' part is to receive our duties, and our duties are to your throne and state children and servants, which do but what they should, by doing everything safe toward your love and honor.", "welcome hither. i have begun to plant thee, and will labor to make thee full of growing. banquo noble banquo, that hast no less deserved, nor must be known no less to have done so, let me infold thee and hold thee to my heart.", "there, if i grow, the harvest is your own.", "my plenteous joys, wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves in drops of sorrow. sons, kinsmen, thanes, and you whose places are the nearest, know we will establish our estate upon our eldest, malcolm, whom we name hereafter the prince of cumberland; which honor must not unaccompanied invest him only, but signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine on all deservers. macbeth from hence to inverness, and bind us further to you.", "the rest is labor which is not used for you: i'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful the hearing of my wife with your approach. so humbly take my leave.", "my worthy cawdor!"], ["the prince of cumberland! that is a step on which i must fall down, or else o'erleap, for in my way it lies. stars, hide your fires; let not light see my black and deep desires. the eye wink at the hand, yet let that be which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.", "true, worthy banquo. he is full so valiant, and in his commendations i am fed; it is a banquet to me. let's after him, whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: it is a peerless kinsman."], ["\"they met me in the day of success, and i have learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than mortal knowledge. when i burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished. whiles i stood rapt in the wonder of it came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'thane of cawdor,' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time with 'hail, king that shalt be!' this have i thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou might'st not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. lay it to thy heart, and farewell.\"", "glamis thou art, and cawdor; and shalt be what thou art promised. yet do i fear thy nature; it is too full o' th' milk of human kindness to catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great, art not without ambition, but without the illness should attend it. what thou wouldst highly, that wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, and yet wouldst wrongly win. thou'ld'st have, great glamis, that which cries, \"thus thou must do,\" if thou have it, and that which rather thou dost fear to do, than wishest should be undone. hie thee hither, that i may pour my spirits in thine ear and chastise with the valor of my tongue all that impedes thee from the golden round, which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem to have thee crowned withal."], ["what is your tidings?", "the king comes here tonight.", "thou 'rt mad to say it. is not thy master with him, who, were 't so, would have informed for preparation?", "so please you, it is true: our thane is coming. one of my fellows had the speed of him, who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more than would make up his message.", "give him tending. he brings great news.", "the raven himself is hoarse that croaks the fatal entrance of duncan under my battlements. come, you spirits that tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, and fill me from the crown to the toe top-full of direst cruelty. make thick my blood. stop up the access and passage to remorse, that no compunctious visitings of nature shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between the effect and it! come to my woman's breasts, and take my milk for gall, you murd'ring ministers, wherever in your sightless substances you wait on nature's mischief. come, thick night, and pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, that my keen knife see not the wound it makes, nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark to cry \"hold, hold!\""], ["great glamis, worthy cawdor, greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter, thy letters have transported me beyond this ignorant present, and i feel now the future in the instant.", "my dearest love, duncan comes here tonight.", "and when goes hence?", "tomorrow, as he purposes.", "o, never shall sun that morrow see! your face, my thane, is as a book where men may read strange matters. to beguile the time, look like the time. bear welcome in your eye, your hand, your tongue. look like th' innocent flower, but be the serpent under 't. he that's coming must be provided for; and you shall put this night's great business into my dispatch, which shall to all our nights and days to come give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.", "we will speak further.", "only look up clear. to alter favor ever is to fear. leave all the rest to me."], ["this castle hath a pleasant seat. the air nimbly and sweetly recommends itself unto our gentle senses.", "this guest of summer, the temple-haunting martlet, does approve, by his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath smells wooingly here. no jutty, frieze, buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle. where they most breed and haunt, i have observed, the air is delicate.", "see, see, our honored hostess! the love that follows us sometime is our trouble, which still we thank as love. herein i teach you how you shall bid god 'ild us for your pains, and thank us for your trouble.", "all our service, in every point twice done and then done double, were poor and single business to contend against those honors deep and broad wherewith your majesty loads our house. for those of old, and the late dignities heaped up to them, we rest your hermits."], ["where's the thane of cawdor? we coursed him at the heels and had a purpose to be his purveyor; but he rides well, and his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him to his home before us. fair and noble hostess, we are your guest tonight.", "your servants ever have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs in compt, to make their audit at your highness' pleasure, still to return your own.", "give me your hand. conduct me to mine host. we love him highly and shall continue our graces towards him. by your leave, hostess."], ["if it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well it were done quickly. if the assassination could trammel up the consequence, and catch with his surcease success; that but this blow might be the be-all and the end-all here, but here, upon this bank and shoal of time, we'd jump the life to come. but in these cases we still have judgment here, that we but teach bloody instructions, which, being taught, return to plague th' inventor: this even-handed justice commends the ingredients of our poisoned chalice to our own lips. he's here in double trust: first, as i am his kinsman and his subject, strong both against the deed; then, as his host, who should against his murderer shut the door, not bear the knife myself. besides, this duncan hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been so clear in his great office, that his virtues will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against the deep damnation of his taking-off; and pity, like a naked newborn babe, striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed upon the sightless couriers of the air, shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, that tears shall drown the wind. i have no spur to prick the sides of my intent, but only vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself and falls on th' other."], ["how now! what news?", "he has almost supped. why have you left the chamber?", "hath he asked for me?", "know you not he has?", "we will proceed no further in this business. he hath honored me of late, and i have bought golden opinions from all sorts of people, which would be worn now in their newest gloss, not cast aside so soon.", "was the hope drunk wherein you dressed yourself? hath it slept since? and wakes it now, to look so green and pale at what it did so freely? from this time such i account thy love. art thou afeard to be the same in thine own act and valor as thou art in desire? wouldst thou have that which thou esteem'st the ornament of life, and live a coward in thine own esteem, letting \"i dare not\" wait upon \"i would, \" like the poor cat i' th' adage?", "prithee, peace: i dare do all that may become a man; who dares do more is none.", "what beast was 't, then, that made you break this enterprise to me? when you durst do it, then you were a man; and to be more than what you were, you would be so much more the man. nor time nor place did then adhere, and yet you would make both. they have made themselves, and that their fitness now does unmake you. i have given suck, and know how tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me. i would, while it was smiling in my face, have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums and dashed the brains out, had i so sworn as you have done to this."], ["if we should fail?", "we fail? but screw your courage to the sticking-place, and we'll not fail. when duncan is asleep whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey soundly invite him his two chamberlains will i with wine and wassail so convince that memory, the warder of the brain, shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason a limbeck only: when in swinish sleep their drenchd natures lie as in a death, what cannot you and i perform upon the unguarded duncan? what not put upon his spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt of our great quell?", "bring forth men-children only, for thy undaunted mettle should compose nothing but males. will it not be received, when we have marked with blood those sleepy two of his own chamber and used their very daggers, that they have done 't?"], ["who dares receive it other, as we shall make our griefs and clamor roar upon his death?", "i am settled, and bend up each corporal agent to this terrible feat. away, and mock the time with fairest show. false face must hide what the false heart doth know."], ["how goes the night, boy?", "the moon is down. i have not heard the clock.", "and she goes down at twelve.", "i take 't 'tis later, sir.", "hold, take my sword. there's husbandry in heaven; their candles are all out. take thee that too. a heavy summons lies like lead upon me, and yet i would not sleep. merciful powers, restrain in me the cursd thoughts that nature gives way to in repose.", "give me my sword. who's there?", "a friend.", "what, sir, not yet at rest? the king's a-bed. he hath been in unusual pleasure, and sent forth great largess to your offices. this diamond he greets your wife withal, by the name of most kind hostess, and shut up in measureless content.", "being unprepared, our will became the servant to defect, which else should free have wrought."], ["all's well. i dreamt last night of the three weird sisters: to you they have showed some truth.", "i think not of them. yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve, we would spend it in some words upon that business, if you would grant the time.", "at your kind'st leisure.", "if you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis, it shall make honor for you.", "so i lose none in seeking to augment it, but still keep my bosom franchised and allegiance clear, i shall be counselled.", "good repose the while!", "thanks, sir: the like to you!", "servant go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready, she strike upon the bell. get thee to bed.", "is this a dagger which i see before me, the handle toward my hand? come, let me clutch thee. i have thee not, and yet i see thee still. art thou not, fatal vision, sensible to feeling as to sight? or art thou but a dagger of the mind, a false creation, proceeding from the heat-oppressd brain? i see thee yet, in form as palpable as this which now i draw. thou marshall'st me the way that i was going, and such an instrument i was to use. mine eyes are made the fools o' th' other senses, or else worth all the rest. i see thee still, and on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, which was not so before. there's no such thing. it is the bloody business which informs thus to mine eyes. now o'er the one half-world nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse the curtained sleep. witchcraft celebrates pale hecate's offerings, and withered murder, alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf, whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace, with tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design moves like a ghost. thou sure and firm-set earth, hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear thy very stones prate of my whereabout, and take the present horror from the time, which now suits with it. whiles i threat, he lives. words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives."], ["i go, and it is done. the bell invites me. hear it not, duncan, for it is a knell that summons thee to heaven or to hell."], ["that which hath made them drunk hath made me bold. what hath quenched them hath given me fire. hark! peace! it was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman, which gives the stern'st good-night. he is about it. the doors are open, and the surfeited grooms do mock their charge with snores. i have drugged their possets, that death and nature do contend about them, whether they live or die.", "who's there? what, ho!", "alack, i am afraid they have awaked, and 'tis not done. th' attempt and not the deed confounds us. hark! i laid their daggers ready; he could not miss 'em. had he not resembled my father as he slept, i had done 't.", "my husband!", "i have done the deed. didst thou not hear a noise?", "i heard the owl scream and the crickets cry. did not you speak?", "when?"], ["now.", "as i descended?", "ay.", "hark! who lies i' th' second chamber?", "donalbain.", "this is a sorry sight.", "a foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.", "there's one did laugh in 's sleep, and one cried. \"murder!\" that they did wake each other. i stood and heard them. but they did say their prayers, and addressed them again to sleep.", "there are two lodged together.", "one cried, \"god bless us!\" and \"amen\" the other, as they had seen me with these hangman's hands. list'ning their fear i could not say \"amen,\" when they did say \"god bless us!\"", "consider it not so deeply.", "but wherefore could not i pronounce \"amen\"? i had most need of blessing, and \"amen\" stuck in my throat.", "these deeds must not be thought after these ways. so, it will make us mad."], ["methought i heard a voice cry, \"sleep no more! macbeth does murder sleep\" the innocent sleep, sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care, the death of each day's life, sore labor's bath, balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, chief nourisher in life's feast.", "what do you mean?", "still it cried, \"sleep no more!\" to all the house. \"glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore cawdor shall sleep no more. macbeth shall sleep no more.\"", "who was it that thus cried? why, worthy thane, you do unbend your noble strength to think so brainsickly of things. go get some water, and wash this filthy witness from your hand. why did you bring these daggers from the place? they must lie there. go carry them and smear the sleepy grooms with blood.", "i'll go no more: i am afraid to think what i have done; look on 't again i dare not.", "infirm of purpose! give me the daggers. the sleeping and the dead are but as pictures. 'tis the eye of childhood that fears a painted devil. if he do bleed, i'll gild the faces of the grooms withal, for it must seem their guilt."], ["whence is that knocking? how is 't with me when every noise appals me? what hands are here? ha! they pluck out mine eyes. will all great neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hand? no, this my hand will rather the multitudinous seas incarnadine, making the green one red.", "my hands are of your color, but i shame to wear a heart so white.", "i hear a knocking at the south entry. retire we to our chamber. a little water clears us of this deed. how easy is it, then! your constancy hath left you unattended.", "hark! more knocking. get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us and show us to be watchers. be not lost so poorly in your thoughts.", "to know my deed, 'twere best not know myself.", "wake duncan with thy knocking. i would thou couldst."], ["here's a knocking indeed! if a man were porter of hell-gate, he should have old turning the key.", "knock, knock, knock! who's there, i' th' name of beelzebub? here's a farmer that hanged himself on the expectation of plenty. come in time, have napkins enough about you, here you'll sweat for 't.", "knock, knock! who's there, in th' other devil's name? faith, here's an equivocator that could swear in both the scales against either scale, who committed treason enough for god's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven. o, come in, equivocator.", "knock, knock, knock! who's there? faith, here's an english tailor come hither for stealing out of a french hose. come in, tailor. here you may roast your goose."], ["knock, knock! never at quiet. what are you? but this place is too cold for hell. i'll devil-porter it no further. i had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire.", "anon, anon! i pray you, remember the porter.", "was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed, that you do lie so late?", "'faith sir, we were carousing till the second cock. and drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.", "what three things does drink especially provoke?", "marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. lechery, sir, it provokes and unprovokes. it provokes the desire, but it takes away the performance. therefore, much drink may be said to be an equivocator with lechery. it makes him, and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off; it persuades him, and disheartens him; makes him stand to and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him.", "i believe drink gave thee the lie last night."], ["that it did, sir, i' th' very throat on me; but i requited him for his lie, and, i think, being too strong for him, though he took up my legs sometime, yet i made a shift to cast him.", "is thy master stirring?", "our knocking has awaked him. here he comes.", "good morrow, noble sir.", "good morrow, both.", "is the king stirring, worthy thane?", "not yet.", "he did command me to call timely on him. i have almost slipped the hour.", "i'll bring you to him.", "i know this is a joyful trouble to you, but yet 'tis one.", "the labor we delight in physics pain. this is the door.", "i'll make so bold to call, for 'tis my limited service.", "goes the king hence today?"], ["he does. he did appoint so.", "the night has been unruly. where we lay, our chimneys were blown down and, as they say, lamentings heard i' th' air, strange screams of death, and prophesying with accents terrible of dire combustion and confused events new hatched to the woeful time. the obscure bird clamored the livelong night. some say the earth was feverous and did shake.", "'twas a rough night.", "my young remembrance cannot parallel a fellow to it.", "o horror, horror, horror! tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!", "what's the matter?", "confusion now hath made his masterpiece. most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope the lord's anointed temple, and stole thence the life o' th' building!", "what is 't you say? \"the life\"?", "mean you his majesty?"], ["approach the chamber, and destroy your sight with a new gorgon. do not bid me speak. see, and then speak yourselves.", "awake, awake! ring the alarum bell. murder and treason! banquo and donalbain! malcolm! awake! shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit, and look on death itself! up, up, and see the great doom's image! malcolm! banquo! as from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites, to countenance this horror! ring the bell", "what's the business, that such a hideous trumpet calls to parley the sleepers of the house? speak, speak!", "o gentle lady, 'tis not for you to hear what i can speak: the repetition, in a woman's ear, would murder as it fell.", "o banquo, banquo, our royal master's murdered!", "woe, alas! what, in our house?"], ["too cruel any where. dear duff, i prithee, contradict thyself, and say it is not so.", "had i but died an hour before this chance, i had lived a blessd time, for from this instant there's nothing serious in mortality. all is but toys. renown and grace is dead. the wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees is left this vault to brag of.", "what is amiss?", "you are, and do not know 't. the spring, the head, the fountain of your blood is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.", "your royal father's murdered.", "oh, by whom?", "those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done 't. their hands and faces were all badged with blood. so were their daggers, which unwiped we found upon their pillows. they stared, and were distracted. no man's life was to be trusted with them.", "oh, yet i do repent me of my fury, that i did kill them."], ["wherefore did you so?", "who can be wise, amazed, temp'rate, and furious, loyal and neutral, in a moment? no man. th' expedition of my violent love outrun the pauser, reason. here lay duncan, his silver skin laced with his golden blood, and his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature for ruin's wasteful entrance; there, the murderers, steeped in the colors of their trade, their daggers unmannerly breeched with gore. who could refrain, that had a heart to love, and in that heart courage to make 's love known?", "help me hence, ho!", "look to the lady.", "donalbain why do we hold our tongues, that most may claim this argument for ours?", "malcolm what should be spoken here, where our fate, hid in an auger-hole, may rush and seize us? let's away. our tears are not yet brewed.", "donalbain nor our strong sorrow upon the foot of motion.", "look to the lady."], ["and when we have our naked frailties hid, that suffer in exposure, let us meet and question this most bloody piece of work, to know it further. fears and scruples shake us. in the great hand of god i stand, and thence against the undivulged pretense i fight of treasonous malice.", "and so do i.", "so all.", "let's briefly put on manly readiness, and meet i' th' hall together.", "well contented.", "what will you do? let's not consort with them. to show an unfelt sorrow is an office which the false man does easy. i'll to england.", "to ireland, i. our separated fortune shall keep us both the safer. where we are, there's daggers in men's smiles. the near in blood, the nearer bloody.", "this murderous shaft that's shot hath not yet lighted, and our safest way is to avoid the aim. therefore, to horse, and let us not be dainty of leave-taking, but shift away. there's warrant in that theft which steals itself when there's no mercy left."], ["threescore and ten i can remember well, within the volume of which time i have seen hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night hath trifled former knowings.", "ha, good father, thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man's act, threatens his bloody stage. by th' clock 'tis day, and yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp. is 't night's predominance or the day's shame that darkness does the face of earth entomb when living light should kiss it?", "'tis unnatural, even like the deed that's done. on tuesday last, a falcon, tow'ring in her pride of place, was by a mousing owl hawked at and killed.", "and duncan's horses a thing most strange and certain beauteous and swift, the minions of their race, turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make war with mankind.", "'tis said they eat each other.", "they did so, to th' amazement of mine eyes that looked upon 't. here comes the good macduff."], ["how goes the world, sir, now?", "why, see you not?", "is 't known who did this more than bloody deed?", "those that macbeth hath slain.", "alas, the day! what good could they pretend?", "they were suborned. malcolm and donalbain, the king's two sons, are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them suspicion of the deed.", "'gainst nature still! thriftless ambition, that will raven up thine own lives' means! then 'tis most like the sovereignty will fall upon macbeth.", "he is already named and gone to scone to be invested.", "where is duncan's body?", "carried to colmekill, the sacred storehouse of his predecessors, and guardian of their bones.", "will you to scone?", "no, cousin, i'll to fife.", "well, i will thither."], ["well, may you see things well done there. adieu, lest our old robes sit easier than our new!", "farewell, father.", "god's benison go with you and with those that would make good of bad and friends of foes."], ["thou hast it now: king, cawdor, glamis, all, as the weird women promised, and i fear thou played'st most foully for 't. yet it was said it should not stand in thy posterity, but that myself should be the root and father of many kings. if there come truth from them as upon thee, macbeth, their speeches shine why, by the verities on thee made good, may they not be my oracles as well, and set me up in hope? but hush, no more.", "here's our chief guest.", "if he had been forgotten, it had been as a gap in our great feast, and all-thing unbecoming.", "tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir, and i'll request your presence.", "let your highness command upon me, to the which my duties are with a most indissoluble tie forever knit."], ["ride you this afternoon?", "ay, my good lord.", "we should have else desired your good advice which still hath been both grave and prosperous in this day's council, but we'll take tomorrow. is 't far you ride?", "as far, my lord, as will fill up the time 'twixt this and supper. go not my horse the better, i must become a borrower of the night for a dark hour or twain.", "fail not our feast.", "my lord, i will not.", "we hear our bloody cousins are bestowed in england and in ireland, not confessing their cruel parricide, filling their hearers with strange invention. but of that tomorrow, when therewithal we shall have cause of state craving us jointly. hie you to horse. adieu, till your return at night. goes fleance with you?", "ay, my good lord. our time does call upon 's.", "i wish your horses swift and sure of foot, and so i do commend you to their backs. farewell.", "let every man be master of his time till seven at night. to make society the sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself till suppertime alone. while then, god be with you!"], ["sirrah, a word with you. attend those men our pleasure?", "they are, my lord, without the palace gate.", "bring them before us.", "to be thus is nothing, but to be safely thus. our fears in banquo stick deep, and in his royalty of nature reigns that which would be feared. 'tis much he dares, and to that dauntless temper of his mind he hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor to act in safety. there is none but he whose being i do fear, and under him my genius is rebuked, as it is said mark antony's was by caesar. he chid the sisters when first they put the name of king upon me and bade them speak to him. then, prophetlike, they hailed him father to a line of kings. upon my head they placed a fruitless crown and put a barren scepter in my grip, thence to be wrenched with an unlineal hand, no son of mine succeeding. if 't be so, for banquo's issue have i filed my mind; for them the gracious duncan have i murdered; put rancors in the vessel of my peace only for them; and mine eternal jewel given to the common enemy of man, to make them kings, the seed of banquo kings! rather than so, come fate into the list, and champion me to th' utterance. who's there?"], ["now go to the door and stay there till we call.", "was it not yesterday we spoke together?", "it was, so please your highness.", "well then, now have you considered of my speeches? know that it was he, in the times past, which held you so under fortune, which you thought had been our innocent self. this i made good to you in our last conference, passed in probation with you, how you were borne in hand, how crossed, the instruments, who wrought with them, and all things else that might to half a soul and to a notion crazed say, \"thus did banquo.\"", "you made it known to us.", "i did so, and went further, which is now our point of second meeting. do you find your patience so predominant in your nature that you can let this go? are you so gospeled to pray for this good man and for his issue, whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave and beggared yours forever?", "we are men, my liege.", "ay, in the catalogue ye go for men, as hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept all by the name of dogs. the valued file distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, the housekeeper, the hunter, every one according to the gift which bounteous nature hath in him closed, whereby he does receive particular addition, from the bill that writes them all alike. and so of men. now, if you have a station in the file, not i' th' worst rank of manhood, say 't, and i will put that business in your bosoms, whose execution takes your enemy off, grapples you to the heart and love of us, who wear our health but sickly in his life, which in his death were perfect."], ["i am one, my liege, whom the vile blows and buffets of the world have so incensed that i am reckless what i do to spite the world.", "and i another so weary with disasters, tugged with fortune, that i would set my life on any chance, to mend it or be rid on 't.", "both of you know banquo was your enemy.", "true, my lord.", "so is he mine; and in such bloody distance that every minute of his being thrusts against my near'st of life. and though i could with barefaced power sweep him from my sight and bid my will avouch it, yet i must not, for certain friends that are both his and mine, whose loves i may not drop, but wail his fall who i myself struck down. and thence it is, that i to your assistance do make love, masking the business from the common eye for sundry weighty reasons."], ["we shall, my lord, perform what you command us.", "though our lives", "your spirits shine through you. within this hour at most i will advise you where to plant yourselves, acquaint you with the perfect spy o' th' time, the moment on 't; for 't must be done tonight, and something from the palace; always thought that i require a clearness. and with him to leave no rubs nor botches in the work fleance, his son, that keeps him company, whose absence is no less material to me than is his father's, must embrace the fate of that dark hour. resolve yourselves apart. i'll come to you anon.", "we are resolved, my lord.", "i'll call upon you straight. abide within.", "it is concluded. banquo, thy soul's flight, if it find heaven, must find it out tonight."], ["is banquo gone from court?", "ay, madam, but returns again tonight.", "say to the king i would attend his leisure for a few words.", "madam, i will.", "naught's had, all's spent, where our desire is got without content. 'tis safer to be that which we destroy than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.", "how now, my lord! why do you keep alone, of sorriest fancies your companions making, using those thoughts which should indeed have died with them they think on? things without all remedy should be without regard. what's done is done.", "we have scorched the snake, not killed it. she'll close and be herself whilst our poor malice remains in danger of her former tooth. but let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep in the affliction of these terrible dreams that shake us nightly. better be with the dead, whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, than on the torture of the mind to lie in restless ecstasy. duncan is in his grave. after life's fitful fever he sleeps well. treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison, malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing can touch him further."], ["come on, gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks. be bright and jovial among your guests tonight.", "so shall i, love, and so, i pray, be you. let your remembrance apply to banquo; present him eminence, both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while that we must lave our honors in these flattering streams, and make our faces vizards to our hearts, disguising what they are.", "you must leave this.", "oh, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife! thou know'st that banquo, and his fleance, lives.", "but in them nature's copy's not eterne.", "there's comfort yet; they are assailable. then be thou jocund. ere the bat hath flown his cloistered flight, ere to black hecate's summons the shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done a deed of dreadful note.", "what's to be done?"], ["be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, till thou applaud the deed. come, seeling night, scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day and with thy bloody and invisible hand cancel and tear to pieces that great bond which keeps me pale. light thickens, and the crow makes wing to th' rooky wood. good things of day begin to droop and drowse; whiles night's black agents to their preys do rouse. thou marvel'st at my words: but hold thee still. things bad begun make strong themselves by ill. so, prithee, go with me."], ["but who did bid thee join with us?", "macbeth.", "he needs not our mistrust, since he delivers our offices and what we have to do to the direction just.", "then stand with us. the west yet glimmers with some streaks of day. now spurs the lated traveler apace to gain the timely inn, and near approaches the subject of our watch.", "hark, i hear horses.", "( give us a light there, ho!", "then 'tis he: the rest that are within the note of expectation already are i' th' court.", "his horses go about.", "almost a mile; but he does usually so all men do from hence to the palace gate make it their walk."], ["a light, a light!", "'tis he.", "stand to 't.", "it will be rain tonight.", "let it come down.", "o treachery! fly, good fleance, fly, fly, fly! thou may 'st revenge o slave!", "who did strike out the light?", "was 't not the way?", "there's but one down. the son is fled.", "we have lost best half of our affair.", "well, let's away and say how much is done."], ["you know your own degrees; sit down. at first and last, the hearty welcome.", "thanks to your majesty.", "ourself will mingle with society and play the humble host. our hostess keeps her state, but in best time we will require her welcome.", "pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends, for my heart speaks they are welcome.", "see, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks. both sides are even. here i'll sit i' th' midst. be large in mirth. anon we'll drink a measure the table round.", "first murderer there's blood upon thy face.", "'tis banquo's then.", "'tis better thee without than he within. is he dispatched?"], ["my lord, his throat is cut. that i did for him.", "thou art the best o' th' cutthroats: yet he's good that did the like for fleance. if thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil.", "most royal sir, fleance is 'scaped.", "then comes my fit again. i had else been perfect, whole as the marble, founded as the rock, as broad and general as the casing air. but now i am cabined, cribbed, confined, bound in to saucy doubts and fears. but banquo's safe?", "ay, my good lord. safe in a ditch he bides, with twenty trenchd gashes on his head, the least a death to nature.", "thanks for that. there the grown serpent lies. the worm that's fled hath nature that in time will venom breed; no teeth for th' present. get thee gone. tomorrow we'll hear ourselves again.", "my royal lord, you do not give the cheer. the feast is sold that is not often vouched, while 'tis a-making, 'tis given with welcome. to feed were best at home; from thence, the sauce to meat is ceremony; meeting were bare without it."], ["sweet remembrancer! now, good digestion wait on appetite, and health on both!", "may 't please your highness sit.", "here had we now our country's honor roofed, were the graced person of our banquo present, who may i rather challenge for unkindness than pity for mischance.", "his absence, sir, lays blame upon his promise. please 't your highness to grace us with your royal company?", "the table's full.", "here is a place reserved, sir.", "where?", "here, my good lord. what is 't that moves your highness?", "which of you have done this?", "what, my good lord?", "ghost thou canst not say i did it. never shake thy gory locks at me."], ["gentlemen, rise. his highness is not well.", "sit, worthy friends. my lord is often thus and hath been from his youth. pray you, keep seat. the fit is momentary; upon a thought he will again be well. if much you note him, you shall offend him and extend his passion. feed and regard him not. macbeth are you a man?", "ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that which might appall the devil.", "o proper stuff! this is the very painting of your fear. this is the air-drawn dagger which you said led you to duncan. oh, these flaws and starts, impostors to true fear, would well become a woman's story at a winter's fire, authorized by her grandam. shame itself! why do you make such faces? when all's done, you look but on a stool.", "prithee, see there! behold! look! lo! how say you? why, what care i? if thou canst nod, speak too. if charnel houses and our graves must send those that we bury back, our monuments shall be the maws of kites.", "what, quite unmanned in folly?"], ["if i stand here, i saw him.", "fie, for shame!", "blood hath been shed ere now, i' th' olden time, ere humane statute purged the gentle weal; ay, and since too, murders have been performed too terrible for the ear. the time has been that, when the brains were out, the man would die, and there an end. but now they rise again with twenty mortal murders on their crowns and push us from our stools. this is more strange than such a murder is.", "my worthy lord, your noble friends do lack you.", "i do forget. do not muse at me, my most worthy friends. i have a strange infirmity, which is nothing to those that know me. come, love and health to all. then i'll sit down. give me some wine. fill full.", "i drink to the general joy o' th' whole table, and to our dear friend banquo, whom we miss; would he were here! to all and him we thirst, and all to all.", "our duties, and the pledge."], ["ghost avaunt, and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee. thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold. thou hast no speculation in those eyes which thou dost glare with!", "think of this, good peers, but as a thing of custom. 'tis no other; only it spoils the pleasure of the time.", "what man dare, i dare. approach thou like the rugged russian bear, the armed rhinoceros, or th' hyrcan tiger; take any shape but that, and my firm nerves shall never tremble. or be alive again, and dare me to the desert with thy sword. if trembling i inhabit then, protest me the baby of a girl. hence, horrible shadow! unreal mockery, hence!", "why so, being gone,", "why so, being gone, i am a man again. pray you sit still.", "you have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting, with most admired disorder.", "can such things be, and overcome us like a summer's cloud, without our special wonder? you make me strange even to the disposition that i owe, when now i think you can behold such sights, and keep the natural ruby of your cheeks, when mine is blanched with fear.", "what sights, my lord?"], ["i pray you, speak not. he grows worse and worse. question enrages him. at once, good night. stand not upon the order of your going, but go at once.", "good night, and better health attend his majesty!", "a kind good night to all!", "it will have blood, they say. blood will have blood. stones have been known to move, and trees to speak. augurs and understood relations have by magot pies and choughs and rooks brought forth the secret'st man of blood. what is the night?", "almost at odds with morning, which is which.", "how say'st thou that macduff denies his person at our great bidding?", "did you send to him, sir?", "i hear it by the way; but i will send. there's not a one of them but in his house i keep a servant fee'd. i will tomorrow and betimes i will to the weird sisters. more shall they speak, for now i am bent to know, by the worst means, the worst. for mine own good, all causes shall give way. i am in blood stepped in so far that, should i wade no more, returning were as tedious as go o'er. strange things i have in head, that will to hand, which must be acted ere they may be scanned."], ["you lack the season of all natures, sleep.", "come, we'll to sleep. my strange and self-abuse is the initiate fear that wants hard use. we are yet but young in deed."], ["why, how now, hecate! you look angerly.", "have i not reason, beldams as you are? saucy and overbold, how did you dare to trade and traffic with macbeth in riddles and affairs of death, and i, the mistress of your charms, the close contriver of all harms, was never called to bear my part, or show the glory of our art? and, which is worse, all you have done hath been but for a wayward son, spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, loves for his own ends, not for you. but make amends now. get you gone, and at the pit of acheron meet me i' th' morning. thither he will come to know his destiny. your vessels and your spells provide, your charms and everything beside. i am for the air. this night i'll spend unto a dismal and a fatal end. great business must be wrought ere noon. upon the corner of the moon there hangs a vap'rous drop profound. i'll catch it ere it come to ground. and that distilled by magic sleights shall raise such artificial sprites as by the strength of their illusion shall draw him on to his confusion."], ["he shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear his hopes 'bove wisdom, grace, and fear. and you all know, security is mortals' chiefest enemy.", "hark! i am called. my little spirit, see, sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.", "come, let's make haste; she'll soon be back again."], ["my former speeches have but hit your thoughts, which can interpret farther. only i say things have been strangely borne. the gracious duncan was pitied of macbeth. marry, he was dead. and the right-valiant banquo walked too late, whom, you may say, if 't please you, fleance killed, for fleance fled. men must not walk too late. who cannot want the thought how monstrous it was for malcolm and for donalbain to kill their gracious father? damnd fact! how it did grieve macbeth! did he not straight in pious rage the two delinquents tear that were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? was not that nobly done? ay, and wisely too, for 'twould have angered any heart alive to hear the men deny 't. so that, i say, he has borne all things well. and i do think that had he duncan's sons under his key as, an't please heaven, he shall not they should find what 'twere to kill a father. so should fleance. but, peace! for from broad words, and 'cause he failed his presence at the tyrant's feast, i hear macduff lives in disgrace. sir, can you tell where he bestows himself?", "the son of duncan from whom this tyrant holds the due of birth lives in the english court and is received of the most pious edward with such grace that the malevolence of fortune nothing takes from his high respect. thither macduff is gone to pray the holy king upon his aid to wake northumberland and warlike siward, that by the help of these with him above to ratify the work we may again give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, do faithful homage and receive free honors. all which we pine for now. and this report hath so exasperated the king that he prepares for some attempt of war."], ["sent he to macduff?", "he did, and with an absolute \"sir, not i,\" the cloudy messenger turns me his back, and hums, as who should say \"you'll rue the time that clogs me with this answer.\"", "and that well might advise him to a caution, t' hold what distance his wisdom can provide. some holy angel fly to the court of england and unfold his message ere he come, that a swift blessing may soon return to this our suffering country under a hand accursed!", "i'll send my prayers with him."], ["thrice the brinded cat hath mewed.", "thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined.", "harpier cries, \"'tis time, 'tis time.\"", "round about the cauldron go, in the poisoned entrails throw. toad, that under cold stone days and nights has thirty-one sweltered venom sleeping got, boil thou first i' th' charmd pot.", "double, double toil and trouble, fire burn, and cauldron bubble.", "fillet of a fenny snake, in the cauldron boil and bake. eye of newt and toe of frog, wool of bat and tongue of dog, adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, lizard's leg and owlet's wing, for a charm of powerful trouble, like a hell-broth boil and bubble.", "double, double toil and trouble, fire burn and cauldron bubble."], ["scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, witches' mummy, maw and gulf of the ravined salt-sea shark, root of hemlock digged i' th' dark, liver of blaspheming jew, gall of goat and slips of yew slivered in the moon's eclipse, nose of turk and tartar's lips, finger of birth-strangled babe ditch-delivered by a drab, make the gruel thick and slab. add thereto a tiger's chaudron, for the ingredients of our cauldron.", "double, double toil and trouble, fire burn and cauldron bubble.", "cool it with a baboon's blood, then the charm is firm and good.", "oh well done! i commend your pains, and every one shall share i' th' gains. and now about the cauldron sing, like elves and fairies in a ring, enchanting all that you put in.", "by the pricking of my thumbs, something wicked this way comes. open, locks, whoever knocks."], ["how now, you secret, black, and midnight hags? what is 't you do?", "a deed without a name.", "i conjure you by that which you profess howe'er you come to know it answer me. though you untie the winds and let them fight against the churches, though the yeasty waves confound and swallow navigation up, though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down, though castles topple on their warders' heads, though palaces and pyramids do slope their heads to their foundations, though the treasure of nature's germens tumble all together, even till destruction sicken, answer me to what i ask you.", "speak.", "demand.", "we'll answer.", "say, if th' hadst rather hear it from our mouths, or from our masters'.", "call 'em. let me see 'em.", "pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten from the murderer's gibbet throw into the flame."], ["come, high or low; thyself and office deftly show!", "tell me, thou unknown power", "he knows thy thought. hear his speech but say thou nought.", "macbeth! macbeth! macbeth! beware macduff. beware the thane of fife. dismiss me. enough.", "whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks. thou hast harped my fear aright. but one word more", "he will not be commanded. here's another more potent than the first.", "macbeth! macbeth! macbeth!", "had i three ears, i'd hear thee.", "be bloody, bold, and resolute. laugh to scorn the power of man, for none of woman born shall harm macbeth.", ""], ["then live, macduff. what need i fear of thee? but yet i'll make assurance double sure, and take a bond of fate. thou shalt not live, that i may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, and sleep in spite of thunder.", "what is this that rises like the issue of a king, and wears upon his baby-brow the round and top of sovereignty?", "listen but speak not to 't.", "be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are. macbeth shall never vanquished be until great birnam wood to high dunsinane hill shall come against him.", "that will never be. who can impress the forest, bid the tree unfix his earthbound root? sweet bodements! good! rebellious dead, rise never till the wood of birnam rise, and our high-placed macbeth shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath to time and mortal custom. yet my heart throbs to know one thing. tell me, if your art can tell so much: shall banquo's issue ever reign in this kingdom?"], ["seek to know no more.", "i will be satisfied. deny me this, and an eternal curse fall on you! let me know. why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this?", "show.", "show.", "show.", "show his eyes and grieve his heart. come like shadows; so depart!", "thou art too like the spirit of banquo. down! thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. and thy hair, thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first. a third is like the former. filthy hags! why do you show me this? a fourth? start, eyes! what, will the line stretch out to th' crack of doom? another yet? a seventh? i'll see no more. and yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass which shows me many more, and some i see that twofold balls and treble scepters carry. horrible sight! now i see 'tis true; for the blood-boltered banquo smiles upon me and points at them for his."], ["what, is this so?", "ay, sir, all this is so. but why stands macbeth thus amazedly? come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites, and show the best of our delights. i'll charm th' air to give a sound, while you perform your antic round. that this great king may kindly say, our duties did his welcome pay.", "where are they? gone? let this pernicious hour stand aye accursd in the calendar! come in, without there.", "what's your grace's will?", "saw you the weird sisters?", "no, my lord.", "came they not by you?", "no, indeed, my lord.", "infected be the air whereon they ride, and damned all those that trust them! i did hear the galloping of horse. who was 't came by?"], ["'tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word macduff is fled to england.", "fled to england?", "ay, my good lord.", "time, thou anticipat'st my dread exploits. the flighty purpose never is o'ertook unless the deed go with it. from this moment the very firstlings of my heart shall be the firstlings of my hand. and even now, to crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: the castle of macduff i will surprise, seize upon fife, give to th' edge o' th' sword his wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls that trace him in his line. no boasting like a fool. this deed i'll do before this purpose cool. but no more sights! where are these gentlemen? come, bring me where they are."], ["what had he done to make him fly the land?", "you must have patience, madam.", "he had none. his flight was madness. when our actions do not, our fears do make us traitors.", "you know not whether it was his wisdom or his fear.", "wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes, his mansion and his titles in a place from whence himself does fly? he loves us not; he wants the natural touch. for the poor wren, the most diminutive of birds, will fight, her young ones in her nest, against the owl. all is the fear and nothing is the love, as little is the wisdom, where the flight so runs against all reason.", "my dearest coz, i pray you school yourself. but for your husband, he is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows the fits o' th' season. i dare not speak much further; but cruel are the times when we are traitors and do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor from what we fear, yet know not what we fear, but float upon a wild and violent sea each way and none. i take my leave of you. shall not be long but i'll be here again. things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward to what they were before. my pretty cousin, blessing upon you."], ["fathered he is, and yet he's fatherless.", "i am so much a fool, should i stay longer it would be my disgrace and your discomfort. i take my leave at once.", "sirrah, your father's dead. and what will you do now? how will you live?", "as birds do, mother.", "what, with worms and flies?", "with what i get, i mean, and so do they.", "poor bird! thou 'dst never fear the net nor lime, the pitfall nor the gin.", "why should i, mother? poor birds they are not set for. my father is not dead, for all your saying.", "yes, he is dead. how wilt thou do for a father?", "nay, how will you do for a husband?", "why, i can buy me twenty at any market."], ["then you'll buy 'em to sell again.", "thou speak'st with all thy wit; and yet, i' faith, with wit enough for thee.", "was my father a traitor, mother?", "ay, that he was.", "what is a traitor?", "why, one that swears and lies.", "and be all traitors that do so?", "every one that does so is a traitor and must be hanged.", "and must they all be hanged that swear and lie?", "every one.", "who must hang them?", "why, the honest men.", "then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars and swearers enough to beat the honest men and hang up them.", "now, god help thee, poor monkey! but how wilt thou do for a father?", "if he were dead, you'd weep for him. if you would not, it were a good sign that i should quickly have a new father.", "poor prattler, how thou talk'st!"], ["bless you, fair dame! i am not to you known, though in your state of honor i am perfect. i doubt some danger does approach you nearly. if you will take a homely man's advice, be not found here. hence with your little ones. to fright you thus methinks i am too savage; to do worse to you were fell cruelty, which is too nigh your person. heaven preserve you! i dare abide no longer.", "whither should i fly? i have done no harm. but i remember now i am in this earthly world, where to do harm is often laudable, to do good sometime accounted dangerous folly. why then, alas, do i put up that womanly defense, to say i have done no harm?", "what are these faces?", "where is your husband?", "i hope, in no place so unsanctified where such as thou mayst find him.", "he's a traitor.", "thou liest, thou shag-haired villain!"], ["what, you egg? young fry of treachery!", "he has killed me, mother. run away, i pray you!"], ["let us seek out some desolate shade and there weep our sad bosoms empty.", "let us rather hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men, bestride our downfall'n birthdom. each new morn new widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows strike heaven on the face, that it resounds as if it felt with scotland and yelled out like syllable of dolor.", "what i believe i'll wail; what know believe, and what i can redress, as i shall find the time to friend, i will. what you have spoke, it may be so perchance. this tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, was once thought honest. you have loved him well. he hath not touched you yet. i am young, but something you may deserve of him through me, and wisdom to offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb t' appease an angry god.", "i am not treacherous.", "but macbeth is. a good and virtuous nature may recoil in an imperial charge. but i shall crave your pardon. that which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose. angels are bright still, though the brightest fell. though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, yet grace must still look so."], ["i have lost my hopes.", "perchance even there where i did find my doubts. why in that rawness left you wife and child, those precious motives, those strong knots of love, without leave-taking? i pray you, let not my jealousies be your dishonors, but mine own safeties. you may be rightly just, whatever i shall think.", "bleed, bleed, poor country! great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure, for goodness dare not check thee. wear thou thy wrongs; the title is affeered. fare thee well, lord. i would not be the villain that thou think'st for the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp, and the rich east to boot.", "be not offended. i speak not as in absolute fear of you. i think our country sinks beneath the yoke. it weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash is added to her wounds. i think withal there would be hands uplifted in my right; and here from gracious england have i offer of goodly thousands. but, for all this, when i shall tread upon the tyrant's head, or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country shall have more vices than it had before, more suffer, and more sundry ways than ever, by him that shall succeed.", "what should he be?"], ["it is myself i mean, in whom i know all the particulars of vice so grafted that, when they shall be opened, black macbeth will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state esteem him as a lamb, being compared with my confineless harms.", "not in the legions of horrid hell can come a devil more damned in evils to top macbeth.", "i grant him bloody, luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful, sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin that has a name. but there's no bottom, none, in my voluptuousness. your wives, your daughters, your matrons, and your maids could not fill up the cistern of my lust, and my desire all continent impediments would o'erbear that did oppose my will. better macbeth than such an one to reign.", "boundless intemperance in nature is a tyranny. it hath been the untimely emptying of the happy throne and fall of many kings. but fear not yet to take upon you what is yours. you may convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty and yet seem cold; the time you may so hoodwink. we have willing dames enough. there cannot be that vulture in you to devour so many as will to greatness dedicate themselves, finding it so inclined."], ["with this there grows in my most ill-composed affection such a stanchless avarice that, were i king, i should cut off the nobles for their lands, desire his jewels and this other's house. and my more-having would be as a sauce to make me hunger more, that i should forge quarrels unjust against the good and loyal, destroying them for wealth.", "this avarice sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been the sword of our slain kings. yet do not fear; scotland hath foisons to fill up your will, of your mere own. all these are portable, with other graces weighed.", "but i have none. the king-becoming graces, as justice, verity, temperance, stableness, bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness, devotion, patience, courage, fortitude, i have no relish of them but abound in the division of each several crime, acting it many ways. nay, had i power, i should pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, uproar the universal peace, confound all unity on earth.", "o scotland, scotland!", "if such a one be fit to govern, speak. i am as i have spoken."], ["fit to govern? no, not to live. o nation miserable, with an untitled tyrant bloody-sceptered, when shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, since that the truest issue of thy throne by his own interdiction stands accursed, and does blaspheme his breed? thy royal father was a most sainted king. the queen that bore thee, oftener upon her knees than on her feet, died every day she lived. fare thee well! these evils thou repeat'st upon thyself have banished me from scotland. o my breast, thy hope ends here!", "macduff, this noble passion, child of integrity, hath from my soul wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts to thy good truth and honor. devilish macbeth by many of these trains hath sought to win me into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me from overcredulous haste. but god above deal between thee and me, for even now i put myself to thy direction and unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure the taints and blames i laid upon myself, for strangers to my nature. i am yet unknown to woman, never was forsworn, scarcely have coveted what was mine own, at no time broke my faith, would not betray the devil to his fellow, and delight no less in truth than life. my first false speaking was this upon myself. what i am truly, is thine and my poor country's to command."], ["whither indeed, before thy here-approach, old siward, with ten thousand warlike men, already at a point, was setting forth. now we'll together, and the chance of goodness be like our warranted quarrel! why are you silent?", "such welcome and unwelcome things at once 'tis hard to reconcile.", "well, more anon. comes the king forth, i pray you?", "ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls that stay his cure. their malady convinces the great assay of art, but at his touch such sanctity hath heaven given his hand they presently amend.", "i thank you, doctor.", "what's the disease he means?", "'tis called the evil. a most miraculous work in this good king, which often since my here-remain in england i have seen him do. how he solicits heaven, himself best knows, but strangely visited people, all swoll'n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, the mere despair of surgery, he cures, hanging a golden stamp about their necks, put on with holy prayers. and, 'tis spoken,"], ["to the succeeding royalty he leaves the healing benediction. with this strange virtue, he hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, and sundry blessings hang about his throne, that speak him full of grace.", "see, who comes here?", "my countryman, but yet i know him not.", "my ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.", "i know him now. good god, betimes remove the means that makes us strangers!", "sir, amen.", "stands scotland where it did?", "alas, poor country! almost afraid to know itself. it cannot be called our mother, but our grave, where nothing, but who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems a modern ecstasy. the dead man's knell is there scarce asked for who, and good men's lives expire before the flowers in their caps, dying or ere they sicken.", "oh, relation too nice and yet too true!"], ["what's the newest grief?", "that of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker. each minute teems a new one.", "how does my wife?", "why, well.", "and all my children?", "well too.", "the tyrant has not battered at their peace?", "no, they were well at peace when i did leave 'em.", "be not a niggard of your speech. how goes 't?", "when i came hither to transport the tidings, which i have heavily borne, there ran a rumor of many worthy fellows that were out; which was to my belief witnessed the rather for that i saw the tyrant's power afoot. now is the time of help. your eye in scotland would create soldiers, make our women fight, to doff their dire distresses.", "be 't their comfort we are coming thither. gracious england hath lent us good siward and ten thousand men; an older and a better soldier none that christendom gives out."], ["would i could answer this comfort with the like. but i have words that would be howled out in the desert air, where hearing should not latch them.", "what concern they? the general cause, or is it a fee-grief due to some single breast?", "no mind that's honest but in it shares some woe, though the main part pertains to you alone.", "if it be mine, keep it not from me. quickly let me have it.", "let not your ears despise my tongue forever, which shall possess them with the heaviest sound that ever yet they heard.", "hum! i guess at it.", "your castle is surprised, your wife and babes savagely slaughtered. to relate the manner, were, on the quarry of these murdered deer to add the death of you.", "merciful heaven! what, man! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows. give sorrow words. the grief that does not speak whispers the o'erfraught heart and bids it break.", "my children too?", "wife, children, servants, all that could be found."], ["and i must be from thence! my wife killed too?", "i have said.", "be comforted. let's make us med'cines of our great revenge, to cure this deadly grief.", "he has no children. all my pretty ones? did you say all? o hell-kite! all? what, all my pretty chickens and their dam at one fell swoop?", "dispute it like a man.", "i shall do so, but i must also feel it as a man. i cannot but remember such things were that were most precious to me. did heaven look on, and would not take their part? sinful macduff, they were all struck for thee! naught that i am, not for their own demerits, but for mine, fell slaughter on their souls. heaven rest them now.", "be this the whetstone of your sword. let grief convert to anger. blunt not the heart, enrage it.", "oh, i could play the woman with mine eyes and braggart with my tongue! but, gentle heavens, cut short all intermission. front to front bring thou this fiend of scotland and myself. within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape, heaven forgive him too."], ["this tune goes manly. come, go we to the king. our power is ready; our lack is nothing but our leave. macbeth is ripe for shaking, and the powers above put on their instruments. receive what cheer you may. the night is long that never finds the day."], ["i have two nights watched with you but can perceive no truth in your report. when was it she last walked?", "since his majesty went into the field, i have seen her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon 't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.", "a great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the line>effects of watching. in this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?", "that, sir, which i will not report after her.", "you may to me, and 'tis most meet you should.", "neither to you nor any one, having no witness to confirm my speech.", "lo you, here she comes. this is her very guise; and, upon my life, fast asleep. observe her, stand close.", "how came she by that light?"], ["why, it stood by her. she has light by her continually. 'tis her command.", "you see her eyes are open.", "ay, but their sense is shut.", "what is it she does now? look, how she rubs her hands.", "it is an accustomed action with her to seem thus washing her hands. i have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.", "yet here's a spot.", "hark! she speaks. i will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.", "out, damned spot! out, i say! one, two. why, then, 'tis time to do 't. hell is murky! fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? what need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account? yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.", "do you mark that?", "the thane of fife had a wife. where is she now? what, will these hands ne'er be clean? no more o' that, my lord, no more o' that. you mar all with this starting.", "go to, go to. you have known what you should not."], ["she has spoke what she should not, i am sure of that. heaven knows what she has known.", "here's the smell of the blood still. all the perfumes of arabia will not sweeten this little hand. oh, oh, oh!", "what a sigh is there! the heart is sorely charged.", "i would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.", "well, well, well.", "pray god it be, sir.", "this disease is beyond my practice. yet i have known those which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their beds.", "wash your hands. put on your nightgown. look not so pale. i tell you yet again, banquo's buried; he cannot come out on 's grave.", "even so?", "to bed, to bed. there's knocking at the gate. come, come, come, come. give me your hand. what's done cannot be undone. to bed, to bed, to bed!", "will she go now to bed?"], ["directly.", "foul whisp'rings are abroad. unnatural deeds do breed unnatural troubles. infected minds to their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets. more needs she the divine than the physician. god, god forgive us all! look after her, remove from her the means of all annoyance, and still keep eyes upon her. so, good night. my mind she has mated, and amazed my sight. i think, but dare not speak.", "good night, good doctor."], ["the english power is near, led on by malcolm, his uncle siward and the good macduff. revenges burn in them, for their dear causes would to the bleeding and the grim alarm excite the mortified man.", "near birnam wood shall we well meet them; that way are they coming.", "who knows if donalbain be with his brother?", "for certain, sir, he is not. i have a file of all the gentry. there is siward's son, and many unrough youths that even now protest their first of manhood.", "what does the tyrant?", "great dunsinane he strongly fortifies. some say he's mad, others that lesser hate him do call it valiant fury. but, for certain, he cannot buckle his distempered cause within the belt of rule.", "now does he feel his secret murders sticking on his hands. now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach. those he commands move only in command, nothing in love. now does he feel his title hang loose about him, like a giant's robe upon a dwarfish thief."], ["who then shall blame his pestered senses to recoil and start, when all that is within him does condemn itself for being there?", "well, march we on, to give obedience where 'tis truly owed. meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, and with him pour we in our country's purge each drop of us.", "or so much as it needs, to dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds. make we our march towards birnam."], ["bring me no more reports. let them fly all. till birnam wood remove to dunsinane i cannot taint with fear. what's the boy malcolm? was he not born of woman? the spirits that know all mortal consequences have pronounced me thus: \"fear not, macbeth. no man that's born of woman shall e'er have power upon thee.\" then fly, false thanes, and mingle with the english epicures. the mind i sway by and the heart i bear shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.", "the devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon! where got'st thou that goose look?", "there is ten thousand", "geese, villain?", "soldiers, sir.", "go, prick thy face and over-red thy fear, thou lily-livered boy. what soldiers, patch? death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine are counselors to fear. what soldiers, whey-face?", "the english force, so please you.", "take thy face hence."], ["seyton! i am sick at heart, when i behold seyton, i say! this push will cheer me ever, or disseat me now. i have lived long enough. my way of life is fall'n into the sere, the yellow leaf, and that which should accompany old age, as honor, love, obedience, troops of friends, i must not look to have, but, in their stead, curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath which the poor heart would fain deny and dare not. seyton!", "what's your gracious pleasure?", "what news more?", "all is confirmed, my lord, which was reported.", "i'll fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked. give me my armor.", "'tis not needed yet.", "i'll put it on. send out more horses. skirr the country round. hang those that talk of fear. give me mine armor. how does your patient, doctor?", "not so sick, my lord, as she is troubled with thick-coming fancies that keep her from her rest."], ["cure her of that. canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, raze out the written troubles of the brain and with some sweet oblivious antidote cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff which weighs upon the heart?", "therein the patient must minister to himself.", "throw physic to the dogs; i'll none of it. come, put mine armor on. give me my staff. seyton, send out. doctor, the thanes fly from me. come, sir, dispatch. if thou couldst, doctor, cast the water of my land, find her disease, and purge it to a sound and pristine health, i would applaud thee to the very echo, that should applaud again. pull 't off, i say. what rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug, would scour these english hence? hear'st thou of them?", "ay, my good lord. your royal preparation makes us hear something.", "bring it after me. i will not be afraid of death and bane, till birnam forest come to dunsinane.", "were i from dunsinane away and clear, profit again should hardly draw me here."], ["cousins, i hope the days are near at hand that chambers will be safe.", "we doubt it nothing.", "what wood is this before us?", "the wood of birnam.", "let every soldier hew him down a bough and bear 't before him. thereby shall we shadow the numbers of our host and make discovery err in report of us.", "it shall be done.", "we learn no other but the confident tyrant keeps still in dunsinane and will endure our setting down before 't.", "'tis his main hope: for, where there is advantage to be given, both more and less have given him the revolt, and none serve with him but constraind things whose hearts are absent too.", "let our just censures attend the true event, and put we on industrious soldiership."], ["the time approaches that will with due decision make us know what we shall say we have and what we owe. thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate, but certain issue strokes must arbitrate. towards which, advance the war."], ["hang out our banners on the outward walls. the cry is still \"they come!\" our castle's strength will laugh a siege to scorn. here let them lie till famine and the ague eat them up. were they not forced with those that should be ours, we might have met them dareful, beard to beard, and beat them backward home.", "what is that noise?", "it is the cry of women, my good lord.", "i have almost forgot the taste of fears. the time has been my senses would have cooled to hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir as life were in 't. i have supped full with horrors. direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts cannot once start me.", "wherefore was that cry?", "the queen, my lord, is dead."], ["she should have died hereafter. there would have been a time for such a word. tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, creeps in this petty pace from day to day to the last syllable of recorded time, and all our yesterdays have lighted fools the way to dusty death. out, out, brief candle! life's but a walking shadow, a poor player that struts and frets his hour upon the stage and then is heard no more. it is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.", "thou comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.", "gracious my lord, i should report that which i say i saw, but know not how to do 't.", "well, say, sir.", "as i did stand my watch upon the hill, i looked toward birnam, and anon methought the wood began to move.", "liar and slave!", "let me endure your wrath, if 't be not so. within this three mile may you see it coming; i say, a moving grove."], ["if thou speak'st false, upon the next tree shall thou hang alive till famine cling thee. if thy speech be sooth, i care not if thou dost for me as much. i pull in resolution and begin to doubt th' equivocation of the fiend that lies like truth. \"fear not, till birnam wood do come to dunsinane\"; and now a wood comes toward dunsinane. arm, arm, and out! if this which he avouches does appear, there is nor flying hence nor tarrying here. i 'gin to be aweary of the sun, and wish th' estate o' th' world were now undone. ring the alarum-bell! blow, wind! come, wrack! at least we'll die with harness on our back."], ["now near enough. your leafy screens throw down, and show like those you are. you, worthy uncle, shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, lead our first battle. worthy macduff and we shall take upon 's what else remains to do, according to our order.", "fare you well. do we but find the tyrant's power tonight, let us be beaten if we cannot fight.", "make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath, those clamorous harbingers of blood and death."], ["they have tied me to a stake. i cannot fly, but, bearlike, i must fight the course. what's he that was not born of woman? such a one am i to fear, or none.", "what is thy name?", "thou 'lt be afraid to hear it.", "no, though thou call'st thyself a hotter name than any is in hell.", "my name's macbeth.", "the devil himself could not pronounce a title more hateful to mine ear.", "no, nor more fearful.", "thou liest, abhorrd tyrant. with my sword i'll prove the lie thou speak'st.", "thou wast born of woman. but swords i smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, brandished by man that's of a woman born."], ["that way the noise is. tyrant, show thy face! if thou beest slain, and with no stroke of mine, my wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still. i cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms are hired to bear their staves. either thou, macbeth, or else my sword with an unbattered edge i sheathe again undeeded. there thou shouldst be; by this great clatter, one of the greatest note seems bruited. let me find him, fortune, and more i beg not.", "this way, my lord. the castle's gently rendered. the tyrant's people on both sides do fight, the noble thanes do bravely in the war, the day almost itself professes yours, and little is to do.", "we have met with foes that strike beside us.", "enter, sir, the castle."], ["why should i play the roman fool and die on mine own sword? whiles i see lives, the gashes do better upon them.", "turn, hellhound, turn!", "of all men else i have avoided thee. but get thee back. my soul is too much charged with blood of thine already.", "i have no words. my voice is in my sword. thou bloodier villain than terms can give thee out!", "thou losest labor. as easy mayst thou the intrenchant air with thy keen sword impress as make me bleed. let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; i bear a charmd life, which must not yield to one of woman born.", "despair thy charm, and let the angel whom thou still hast served tell thee, macduff was from his mother's womb untimely ripped."], ["accursd be that tongue that tells me so, for it hath cowed my better part of man! and be these juggling fiends no more believed, that palter with us in a double sense, that keep the word of promise to our ear, and break it to our hope. i'll not fight with thee.", "then yield thee, coward, and live to be the show and gaze o' th' time. we'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are, painted on a pole, and underwrit, \"here may you see the tyrant.\"", "i will not yield, to kiss the ground before young malcolm's feet, and to be baited with the rabble's curse. though birnam wood be come to dunsinane, and thou opposed, being of no woman born, yet i will try the last. before my body i throw my warlike shield. lay on, macduff, and damned be him that first cries, \"hold, enough!\"", "i would the friends we miss were safe arrived.", "some must go off. and yet, by these i see, so great a day as this is cheaply bought.", "macduff is missing, and your noble son.", "your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt. he only lived but till he was a man, the which no sooner had his prowess confirmed in the unshrinking station where he fought, but like a man he died."], ["then he is dead?", "ay, and brought off the field. your cause of sorrow must not be measured by his worth, for then it hath no end.", "had he his hurts before?", "ay, on the front.", "why then, god's soldier be he! had i as many sons as i have hairs, i would not wish them to a fairer death. and so, his knell is knolled.", "he's worth more sorrow, and that i'll spend for him.", "he's worth no more. they say he parted well and paid his score. and so, god be with him! here comes newer comfort.", "hail, king! for so thou art. behold where stands the usurper's cursd head. the time is free. i see thee compassed with thy kingdom's pearl, that speak my salutation in their minds, whose voices i desire aloud with mine. hail, king of scotland!"], ["hail, king of scotland!", "we shall not spend a large expense of time before we reckon with your several loves and make us even with you. my thanes and kinsmen, henceforth be earls, the first that ever scotland in such an honor named. what's more to do, which would be planted newly with the time, as calling home our exiled friends abroad that fled the snares of watchful tyranny, producing forth the cruel ministers of this dead butcher and his fiendlike queen, who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands took off her life; this, and what needful else that calls upon us, by the grace of grace, we will perform in measure, time, and place. so, thanks to all at once and to each one, whom we invite to see us crowned at scone."]], [["in sooth, i know not why i am so sad. it wearies me; you say it wearies you. but how i caught it, found it, or came by it, what stuff 'tis made of, whereof it is born, i am to learn. and such a want-wit sadness makes of me, that i have much ado to know myself.", "your mind is tossing on the ocean, there, where your argosies with portly sail, like signors and rich burghers on the flood or, as it were, the pageants of the sea do overpeer the petty traffickers that curtsy to them, do them reverence as they fly by them with their woven wings.", "believe me, sir, had i such venture forth, the better part of my affections would be with my hopes abroad. i should be still plucking the grass to know where sits the wind, peering in maps for ports and piers and roads. and every object that might make me fear misfortune to my ventures out of doubt would make me sad."], ["my wind cooling my broth would blow me to an ague when i thought what harm a wind too great at sea might do. i should not see the sandy hourglass run, but i should think of shallows and of flats and see my wealthy andrew docked in sand, vailing her high top lower than her ribs to kiss her burial. should i go to church and see the holy edifice of stone and not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks, which, touching but my gentle vessel's side, would scatter all her spices on the stream, enrobe the roaring waters with my silks, and, in a word, but even now worth this, and now worth nothing? shall i have the thought to think on this, and shall i lack the thought that such a thing bechanced would make me sad? but tell not me. i know antonio is sad to think upon his merchandise.", "believe me, no. i thank my fortune for it my ventures are not in one bottom trusted, nor to one place, nor is my whole estate upon the fortune of this present year. therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.", "why then, you are in love.", "fie, fie!", "not in love neither? then let us say you are sad because you are not merry and 'twere as easy for you to laugh and leap and say you are merry because you are not sad. now, by two-headed janus, nature hath framed strange fellows in her time."], ["some that will evermore peep through their eyes and laugh like parrots at a bagpiper, and other of such vinegar aspect that they'll not show their teeth in way of smile though nestor swear the jest be laughable.", "here comes bassanio, your most noble kinsman, gratiano, and lorenzo. fare ye well. we leave you now with better company.", "i would have stayed till i had made you merry if worthier friends had not prevented me.", "your worth is very dear in my regard. i take it your own business calls on you and you embrace th' occasion to depart.", "bassanio, lorenzo, gratiano good morrow, my good lords.", "salarino solanio good signors both, when shall we laugh? say, when? you grow exceeding strange. must it be so?", "we'll make our leisures to attend on yours.", "my lord bassanio, since you have found antonio, we two will leave you. but at dinnertime i pray you have in mind where we must meet.", "i will not fail you."], ["you look not well, signor antonio. you have too much respect upon the world. they lose it that do buy it with much care. believe me, you are marvelously changed.", "i hold the world but as the world, gratiano a stage where every man must play a part, and mine a sad one.", "let me play the fool. with mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come. and let my liver rather heat with wine than my heart cool with mortifying groans. why should a man whose blood is warm within sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster, sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice by being peevish? i tell thee what, antonio i love thee, and 'tis my love that speaks there are a sort of men whose visages do cream and mantle like a standing pond, and do a willful stillness entertain with purpose to be dressed in an opinion of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit, as who should say, \"i am sir oracle, and when i ope my lips, let no dog bark!\" o my antonio, i do know of these that therefore only are reputed wise for saying nothing, when i am very sure if they should speak, would almost damn those ears which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools. i'll tell thee more of this another time. but fish not with this melancholy bait for this fool gudgeon, this opinion. come, good lorenzo. fare ye well awhile. i'll end my exhortation after dinner."], ["well, we will leave you then till dinnertime. i must be one of these same dumb wise men, for gratiano never lets me speak.", "well, keep me company but two years more, thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.", "farewell. i'll grow a talker for this gear.", "thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable in a neat's tongue dried and a maid not vendible.", "is that any thing now?", "gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all venice. his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them they are not worth the search.", "well, tell me now what lady is the same to whom you swore a secret pilgrimage, that you today promised to tell me of?", "'tis not unknown to you, antonio, how much i have disabled mine estate, by something showing a more swelling port than my faint means would grant continuance. nor do i now make moan to be abridged from such a noble rate. but my chief care"], ["is to come fairly off from the great debts wherein my time something too prodigal hath left me gaged. to you, antonio, i owe the most in money and in love, and from your love i have a warranty to unburden all my plots and purposes how to get clear of all the debts i owe.", "i pray you, good bassanio, let me know it. and if it stand, as you yourself still do, within the eye of honor, be assured my purse, my person, my extremest means lie all unlocked to your occasions.", "in my school days, when i had lost one shaft, i shot his fellow of the selfsame flight the selfsame way with more advisd watch to find the other forth and by adventuring both, i oft found both. i urge this childhood proof because what follows is pure innocence. i owe you much, and, like a willful youth, that which i owe is lost. but if you please to shoot another arrow that self way which you did shoot the first, i do not doubt, as i will watch the aim, or to find both or bring your latter hazard back again and thankfully rest debtor for the first.", "you know me well, and herein spend but time to wind about my love with circumstance. and out of doubt you do me now more wrong in making question of my uttermost than if you had made waste of all i have. then do but say to me what i should do that in your knowledge may by me be done, and i am pressed unto it. therefore speak."], ["in belmont is a lady richly left, and she is fair and fairer than that word of wondrous virtues. sometimes from her eyes i did receive fair speechless messages. her name is portia, nothing undervalued to cato's daughter, brutus' portia. nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth, for the four winds blow in from every coast renownd suitors, and her sunny locks hang on her temples like a golden fleece, which makes her seat of belmont colchos' strand, and many jasons come in quest of her. o my antonio, had i but the means to hold a rival place with one of them, i have a mind presages me such thrift that i should questionless be fortunate!", "thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea. neither have i money nor commodity to raise a present sum. therefore go forth, try what my credit can in venice do that shall be racked even to the uttermost to furnish thee to belmont, to fair portia. go presently inquire, and so will i, where money is, and i no question make to have it of my trust or for my sake."], ["by my troth, nerissa, my little body is aweary of this great world.", "you would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance as your good fortunes are. and yet for aught i see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing. it is no mean happiness, therefore, to be seated in the mean. superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.", "good sentences, and well pronounced.", "they would be better if well followed.", "if to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been churches and poor men's cottages princes' palaces. it is a good divine that follows his own instructions. i can easier teach twenty what were good to be done than be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching. the brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree. such a hare is madness the youth to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the cripple. but this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a husband. o me, the word \"choose!\" i may neither choose whom i would nor refuse whom i dislike so is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father. is it not hard, nerissa, that i cannot choose one nor refuse none?"], ["your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good inspirations. therefore the lottery that he hath devised in these three chests of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning chooses you, will no doubt never be chosen by any rightly but one who shall rightly love. but what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these princely suitors that are already come?", "i pray thee, overname them. and as thou namest them, i will describe them. and according to my description, level at my affection.", "first, there is the neapolitan prince.", "ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of his horse, and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts that he can shoe him himself. i am much afeard my lady his mother played false with a smith.", "then there is the county palatine.", "he doth nothing but frown, as who should say, \"an you will not have me, choose.\" he hears merry tales and smiles not. i fear he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. i had rather be married to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of these. god defend me from these two!", "how say you by the french lord, monsieur le bon?"], ["god made him and therefore let him pass for a man. in truth, i know it is a sin to be a mocker, but he! why, he hath a horse better than the neapolitan's, a better bad habit of frowning than the count palatine. he is every man in no man. if a throstle sing, he falls straight a- capering. he will fence with his own shadow. if i should marry him, i should marry twenty husbands. if he would despise me i would forgive him, for if he love me to madness i shall never requite him.", "what say you then to falconbridge, the young baron of england?", "you know i say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor i him. he hath neither latin, french, nor italian, and you will come into the court and swear that i have a poor pennyworth in the english. he is a proper man's picture, but alas, who can converse with a dumb show? how oddly he is suited! i think he bought his doublet in italy, his round hose in france, his bonnet in germany, and his behavior everywhere.", "what think you of the scottish lord, his neighbor?", "that he hath a neighborly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the ear of the englishman and swore he would pay him again when he was able. i think the frenchman became his surety and sealed under for another."], ["how like you the young german, the duke of saxony's nephew?", "very vilely in the morning, when he is sober, and most vilely in the afternoon, when he is drunk. when he is best he is a little worse than a man, and when he is worst he is little better than a beast. and the worst fall that ever fell, i hope i shall make shift to go without him.", "if he should offer to choose and choose the right casket, you should refuse to perform your father's will if you should refuse to accept him.", "therefore, for fear of the worst, i pray thee, set a deep glass of rhenish wine on the contrary casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation without, i know he will choose it. i will do any thing, nerissa, ere i'll be married to a sponge.", "you need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords. they have acquainted me with their determinations, which is indeed to return to their home and to trouble you with no more suit unless you may be won by some other sort than your father's imposition depending on the caskets.", "if i live to be as old as sibylla, i will die as chaste as diana unless i be obtained by the manner of my father's will. i am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but i dote on his very absence. and i pray god grant them a fair departure.", "do you not remember, lady, in your father's time a venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of the marquess of montferrat?"], ["yes, yes, it was bassanio as i think he was so called.", "true, madam. he, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.", "i remember him well, and i remember him worthy of thy praise.", "how now, what news?", "the four strangers seek for you, madam, to take their leave. and there is a forerunner come from a fifth, the prince of morocco, who brings word the prince his master will be here tonight.", "if i could bid the fifth welcome with so good a heart as i can bid the other four farewell, i should be glad of his approach. if he have the condition of a saint and the complexion of a devil, i had rather he should shrive me than wive me. come, nerissa. servant sirrah, go before. whiles we shut the gates upon one wooer another knocks at the door."], ["three thousand ducats, well.", "ay, sir, for three months.", "for three months, well.", "for the which, as i told you, antonio shall be bound.", "antonio shall become bound, well.", "may you stead me? will you pleasure me? shall i know your answer?", "three thousand ducats for three months, and antonio bound.", "your answer to that?", "antonio is a good man.", "have you heard any imputation to the contrary?", "ho, no, no, no, no. my meaning in saying he is a good man is to have you understand me that he is sufficient. yet his means are in supposition. he hath an argosy bound to tripolis, another to the indies. i understand moreover, upon the rialto, he hath a third at mexico, a fourth for england, and other ventures he hath squandered abroad."], ["but ships are but boards, sailors but men. there be land rats and water rats, water thieves and land thieves i mean pirates and then there is the peril of waters, winds, and rocks. the man is notwithstanding sufficient.", "be assured you may.", "i will be assured i may, and that i may be assured, i will bethink me. may i speak with antonio?", "if it please you to dine with us.", "yes to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your prophet the nazarite conjured the devil into. i will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so following, but i will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with you. what news on the rialto? who is he comes here?", "this is signor antonio.", "how like a fawning publican he looks! i hate him for he is a christian, but more for that in low simplicity he lends out money gratis and brings down the rate of usance here with us in venice. if i can catch him once upon the hip, i will feed fat the ancient grudge i bear him. he hates our sacred nation, and he rails, even there where merchants most do congregate, on me, my bargains and my well-won thrift,"], ["which he calls \"interest.\" cursd be my tribe if i forgive him!", "shylock, do you hear?", "i am debating of my present store, and by the near guess of my memory i cannot instantly raise up the gross of full three thousand ducats. what of that? tubal, a wealthy hebrew of my tribe, will furnish me. but soft! how many months do you desire? antonio rest you fair, good signor. your worship was the last man in our mouths.", "shylock, albeit i neither lend nor borrow by taking nor by giving of excess, yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend, i'll break a custom. bassanio is he yet possessed how much ye would?", "ay, ay, three thousand ducats.", "and for three months.", "i had forgot three months. bassanio you told me so. antonio well then, your bond, and let me see but hear you, methought you said you neither lend nor borrow upon advantage."], ["i do never use it.", "when jacob grazed his uncle laban's sheep this jacob from our holy abram was, as his wise mother wrought in his behalf, the third possessor, ay, he was the third", "and what of him? did he take interest?", "no, not take interest not as you would say directly interest. mark what jacob did: when laban and himself were compromised that all the eanlings which were streaked and pied should fall as jacob's hire, the ewes, being rank, in the end of autumn turnd to the rams. and when the work of generation was between these woolly breeders in the act, the skillful shepherd peeled me certain wands. and in the doing of the deed of kind he stuck them up before the fulsome ewes, who then conceiving did in eaning time fall parti-colored lambs and those were jacob's. this was a way to thrive, and he was blessed. and thrift is blessing, if men steal it not.", "this was a venture, sir, that jacob served for a thing not in his power to bring to pass but swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven. was this inserted to make interest good? or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?", "i cannot tell: i make it breed as fast. but note me, signor"], ["mark you this, bassanio, the devil can cite scripture for his purpose. an evil soul producing holy witness is like a villain with a smiling cheek, a goodly apple rotten at the heart. oh, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!", "three thousand ducats 'tis a good round sum. three months from twelve, then. let me see. the rate", "well, shylock, shall we be beholding to you?", "signor antonio, many a time and oft in the rialto you have rated me about my moneys and my usances. still have i borne it with a patient shrug, for sufferance is the badge of all our tribe. you call me misbeliever, cutthroat dog, and spet upon my jewish gaberdine and all for use of that which is mine own. well then, it now appears you need my help. go to, then! you come to me and you say, \"shylock, we would have moneys.\" you say so! you, that did void your rheum upon my beard and foot me as you spurn a stranger cur over your threshold! moneys is your suit. what should i say to you? should i not say, \"hath a dog money? is it possible a cur can lend three thousand ducats?\" or shall i bend low and in a bondman's key with bated breath and whispering humbleness say this:"], ["\"fair sir, you spet on me on wednesday last; you spurned me such a day; another time you called me 'dog' and for these courtesies i'll lend you thus much moneys?\"", "i am as like to call thee so again, to spet on thee again, to spurn thee too. if thou wilt lend this money, lend it not as to thy friends, for when did friendship take a breed for barren metal of his friend? but lend it rather to thine enemy, who, if he break, thou mayst with better face exact the penalty.", "why, look you how you storm! i would be friends with you and have your love, forget the shames that you have stained me with, supply your present wants and take no doit of usance for my moneys and you'll not hear me! this is kind i offer.", "this were kindness.", "this kindness will i show. go with me to a notary, seal me there your single bond, and in a merry sport if you repay me not on such a day, in such a place, such sum or sums as are expressed in the condition, let the forfeit be nominated for an equal pound of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken in what part of your body pleaseth me.", "content, in faith. i'll seal to such a bond, and say there is much kindness in the jew."], ["you shall not seal to such a bond for me! i'll rather dwell in my necessity.", "why, fear not, man. i will not forfeit it. within these two months that's a month before this bond expires i do expect return of thrice three times the value of this bond.", "o father abram, what these christians are, whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect the thoughts of others! pray you, tell me this: if he should break his day, what should i gain by the exaction of the forfeiture? a pound of man's flesh taken from a man is not so estimable, profitable neither, as flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. i say, to buy his favor i extend this friendship. if he will take it, so. if not, adieu. and for my love i pray you wrong me not.", "yes, shylock, i will seal unto this bond.", "then meet me forthwith at the notary's. give him direction for this merry bond, and i will go and purse the ducats straight, see to my house left in the fearful guard of an unthrifty knave, and presently i will be with you.", "hie thee, gentle jew.", "the hebrew will turn christian. he grows kind."], ["i like not fair terms and a villain's mind.", "come on. in this there can be no dismay. my ships come home a month before the day."], ["mislike me not for my complexion, the shadowed livery of the burnished sun, to whom i am a neighbor and near bred. bring me the fairest creature northward born, where phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles, and let us make incision for your love to prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine. i tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine hath feared the valiant. by my love i swear the best-regarded virgins of our clime have loved it too. i would not change this hue except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.", "in terms of choice i am not solely led by nice direction of a maiden's eyes. besides, the lottery of my destiny bars me the right of voluntary choosing. but if my father had not scanted me and hedged me by his wit to yield myself his wife who wins me by that means i told you, yourself, renownd prince, then stood as fair as any comer i have looked on yet for my affection."], ["even for that i thank you. therefore i pray you lead me to the caskets to try my fortune. by this scimitar that slew the sophy and a persian prince that won three fields of sultan solyman, i would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look, outbrave the heart most daring on the earth, pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear, yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey, to win the lady. but, alas the while! if hercules and lychas play at dice which is the better man, the greater throw may turn by fortune from the weaker hand. so is alcides beaten by his page, and so may i, blind fortune leading me, miss that which one unworthier may attain and die with grieving.", "you must take your chance, and either not attempt to choose at all or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong never to speak to lady afterward in way of marriage. therefore be advised.", "nor will not. come, bring me unto my chance.", "first, forward to the temple. after dinner your hazard shall be made.", "good fortune then! to make me blessed or cursed'st among men."], ["certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this jew, my master. the fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me, saying to me, \"gobbo,\" \"launcelot gobbo,\" \"good launcelot,\" or \"good gobbo,\" or \"good launcelot gobbo\" \"use your legs, take the start, run away.\" my conscience says, \"no. take heed, honest launcelot. take heed, honest gobbo,\" or as aforesaid, \"honest launcelot gobbo, do not run. scorn running with thy heels.\" well, the most courageous fiend bids me pack. \"fia!\" says the fiend. \"away!\" says the fiend. \"for the heavens, rouse up a brave mind,\" says the fiend, \"and run.\" well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my heart, says very wisely to me, \"my honest friend launcelot, being an honest man's son\" or rather an honest woman's son, for indeed my father did something smack, something grow to. he had a kind of taste. well, my conscience says, \"launcelot, budge not.\" \"budge!\" says the fiend. \"budge not,\" says my conscience. \"conscience,\" say i, \"you counsel well.\" \"fiend,\" say i, \"you counsel well.\" to be ruled by my conscience i should stay with the jew my master, who, god bless the mark, is a kind of devil. and to run away from the jew i should be ruled by the fiend, who, saving your reverence, is the devil himself. certainly the jew is the very devil incarnation. and in my conscience, my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with the jew. the fiend gives the more friendly counsel. i will run, fiend. my heels are at your command. i will run."], ["master young man, you, i pray you, which is the way to master jew's?", "o heavens, this is my true-begotten father, who, being more than sand-blind high-gravel blind knows me not. i will try confusions with him.", "master young gentleman, i pray you, which is the way to master jew's?", "turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but at the next turning of all on your left. marry, at the very next turning turn of no hand, but turn down indirectly to the jew's house.", "by god's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit. can you tell me whether one launcelot that dwells with him, dwell with him or no?", "talk you of young master launcelot? mark me now. now will i raise the waters. talk you of young master launcelot?", "no \"master,\" sir, but a poor man's son. his father, though i say 't, is an honest exceeding poor man and, god be thanked, well to live.", "well, let his father be what he will, we talk of young master launcelot.", "your worship's friend and launcelot, sir."], ["but i pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, i beseech you, talk you of young master launcelot?", "of launcelot, an 't please your mastership.", "ergo, master launcelot. talk not of master launcelot, father, for the young gentleman, according to fates and destinies and such odd sayings, the sisters three and such branches of learning, is indeed deceased, or as you would say in plain terms, gone to heaven.", "marry, god forbid! the boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.", "do i look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or a prop? do you know me, father?", "alack the day, i know you not, young gentleman. but i pray you, tell me, is my boy, god rest his soul, alive or dead?", "do you not know me, father?", "alack, sir, i am sand-blind. i know you not.", "nay, indeed if you had your eyes, you might fail of the knowing me. it is a wise father that knows his own child. well, old man, i will tell you news of your son. give me your blessing. truth will come to light. murder cannot be hid long a man's son may, but in the end truth will out."], ["pray you, sir, stand up. i am sure you are not launcelot, my boy.", "pray you, let's have no more fooling about it, but give me your blessing. i am launcelot, your boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall be.", "i cannot think you are my son.", "i know not what i shall think of that. but i am launcelot, the jew's man, and i am sure margery your wife is my mother.", "her name is margery, indeed. i'll be sworn, if thou be launcelot, thou art mine own flesh and blood. launcelot lord worshipped might he be, what a beard hast thou got! thou hast got more hair on thy chin than dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.", "it should seem then that dobbin's tail grows backward. i am sure he had more hair of his tail than i have of my face when i last saw him.", "lord, how art thou changed! how dost thou and thy master agree? i have brought him a present. how 'gree you now?", "well, well, but for mine own part, as i have set up my rest to run away, so i will not rest till i have run some ground. my master's a very jew. give him a present. give him a halter. i am famished in his service. you may tell every finger i have with my ribs. father, i am glad you are come. give me your present to one master bassanio, who indeed gives rare new liveries."], ["if i serve not him, i will run as far as god has any ground. o rare fortune! here comes the man. to him, father, for i am a jew if i serve the jew any longer.", "you may do so, but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five of the clock. see these letters delivered, put the liveries to making, and desire gratiano to come anon to my lodging.", "to him, father.", "bassanio god bless your worship!", "gramercy! wouldst thou aught with me?", "here's my son, sir, a poor boy", "not a poor boy, sir, but the rich jew's man that would, sir, as my father shall specify", "he hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve", "indeed the short and the long is, i serve the jew and have a desire, as my father shall specify"], ["his master and he, saving your worship's reverence, are scarce cater-cousins", "to be brief, the very truth is that the jew, having done me wrong, doth cause me, as my father, being, i hope, an old man, shall frutify unto you", "i have here a dish of doves that i would bestow upon your worship, and my suit is", "in very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as your worship shall know by this honest old man and though i say it, though old man, yet poor man, my father", "one speak for both. what would you?", "serve you, sir.", "that is the very defect of the matter, sir.", "i know thee well. thou hast obtained thy suit. shylock thy master spoke with me this day, and hath preferred thee, if it be preferment to leave a rich jew's service, to become the follower of so poor a gentleman.", "the old proverb is very well parted between my master shylock and you, sir you have \"the grace of god,\" sir, and he hath \"enough.\"", "thou speak'st it well. go, father, with thy son. take leave of thy old master and inquire my lodging out. give him a livery more guarded than his fellows'. see it done."], ["father, in. i cannot get a service, no. i have ne'er a tongue in my head. well, if any man in italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book, i shall have good fortune. go to, here's a simple line of life. here's a small trifle of wives. alas, fifteen wives is nothing! eleven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in for one man. and then to 'scape drowning thrice and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a feather-bed here are simple 'scapes. well, if fortune be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear. father, come. i'll take my leave of the jew in the twinkling.", "i pray thee, good leonardo, think on this. these things being bought and orderly bestowed, return in haste, for i do feast tonight my best esteemed acquaintance. hie thee, go.", "my best endeavours shall be done herein.", "leonardo where is your master?", "yonder, sir, he walks."], ["signor bassanio!", "gratiano!", "i have a suit to you.", "you have obtained it.", "you must not deny me. i must go with you to belmont.", "why, then you must. but hear thee, gratiano. thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice parts that become thee happily enough and in such eyes as ours appear not faults. but where thou art not known, why, there they show something too liberal. pray thee, take pain to allay with some cold drops of modesty thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior i be misconst'red in the place i go to, and lose my hopes.", "signor bassanio, hear me. if i do not put on a sober habit, talk with respect and swear but now and then, wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely nay more. while grace is saying, hood mine eyes thus with my hat, and sigh and say, \"amen\" use all the observance of civility like one well studied in a sad ostent to please his grandam, never trust me more.", "well, we shall see your bearing.", "nay, but i bar tonight. you shall not gauge me by what we do tonight."], ["no, that were pity. i would entreat you rather to put on your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends that purpose merriment. but fare you well. i have some business.", "and i must to lorenzo and the rest. but we will visit you at supper time."], ["i am sorry thou wilt leave my father so. our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil, didst rob it of some taste of tediousness. but fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee. and launcelot, soon at supper shalt thou see lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest. give him this letter. launcelot do it secretly. and so farewell. i would not have my father see me in talk with thee.", "adieu! tears exhibit my tongue. most beautiful pagan, most sweet jew! if a christian do not play the knave and get thee, i am much deceived. but adieu. these foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit. adieu.", "farewell, good launcelot.", "alack, what heinous sin is it in me to be ashamed to be my father's child! but though i am a daughter to his blood, i am not to his manners. o lorenzo, if thou keep promise, i shall end this strife, become a christian and thy loving wife."], ["nay, we will slink away in supper time, disguise us at my lodging, and return, all in an hour.", "we have not made good preparation.", "we have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.", "'tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered, and better in my mind not undertook.", "'tis now but four o'clock. we have two hours to furnish us.", "friend launcelot, what's the news?", "lorenzo an it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem to signify.", "i know the hand. in faith, 'tis a fair hand, and whiter than the paper it writ on is the fair hand that writ.", "love news, in faith?", "lorenzo by your leave, sir."], ["whither goest thou?", "marry, sir, to bid my old master the jew to sup tonight with my new master the christian.", "launcelot hold here, take this. tell gentle jessica i will not fail her. speak it privately. go, gentlemen, will you prepare you for this masque tonight? i am provided of a torchbearer.", "ay, marry, i'll be gone about it straight.", "and so will i.", "meet me and gratiano at gratiano's lodging some hour hence.", "'tis good we do so.", "was not that letter from fair jessica?"], ["i must needs tell thee all. she hath directed how i shall take her from her father's house, what gold and jewels she is furnished with, what page's suit she hath in readiness. if e'er the jew her father come to heaven, it will be for his gentle daughter's sake. and never dare misfortune cross her foot unless she do it under this excuse: that she is issue to a faithless jew. come, go with me. gratiano peruse this as thou goest. fair jessica shall be my torchbearer."], ["well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge, the difference of old shylock and bassanio. what, jessica! thou shalt not gormandize as thou hast done with me. what, jessica! and sleep and snore, and rend apparel out why, jessica, i say!", "why, jessica!", "who bids thee call? i do not bid thee call.", "your worship was wont to tell me that i could do nothing without bidding.", "call you? what is your will?", "i am bid forth to supper, jessica. there are my keys. but wherefore should i go? i am not bid for love. they flatter me. but yet i'll go in hate to feed upon the prodigal christian. jessica, my girl, look to my house. i am right loath to go. there is some ill a-brewing towards my rest, for i did dream of money bags tonight."], ["i beseech you, sir, go. my young master doth expect your reproach.", "so do i his.", "and they have conspired together. i will not say you shall see a masque, but if you do then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on black monday last at six o'clock i' th' morning falling out that year on ash wednesday was four year in th' afternoon.", "what, are there masques? hear you me, jessica. lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum and the vile squealing of the wry-necked fife, clamber not you up to the casements then, nor thrust your head into the public street to gaze on christian fools with varnished faces. but stop my house's ears i mean my casements let not the sound of shallow foppery enter my sober house. by jacob's staff, i swear, i have no mind of feasting forth tonight. but i will go. go you before me, sirrah. say i will come.", "i will go before, sir. mistress, look out at window, for all this. there will come a christian by will be worth a jewess' eye."], ["what says that fool of hagar's offspring, ha?", "his words were, \"farewell, mistress.\" nothing else.", "the patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder, snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day more than the wildcat. drones hive not with me. therefore i part with him, and part with him to one that would have him help to waste his borrowed purse. well, jessica, go in. perhaps i will return immediately. do as i bid you. shut doors after you. fast bind, fast find. a proverb never stale in thrifty mind.", "farewell, and if my fortune be not crost, i have a father, you a daughter, lost."], ["this is the penthouse under which lorenzo desired us to make stand.", "his hour is almost past.", "and it is marvel he outdwells his hour, for lovers ever run before the clock.", "oh, ten times faster venus' pigeons fly to seal love's bonds new made than they are wont to keep obligd faith unforfeited.", "that ever holds. who riseth from a feast with that keen appetite that he sits down? where is the horse that doth untread again his tedious measures with the unbated fire that he did pace them first? all things that are, are with more spirit chasd than enjoyed. how like a younger or a prodigal the scarfd bark puts from her native bay, hugged and embrad by the strumpet wind! how like the prodigal doth she return, with overweathered ribs and ragged sails lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind!", "here comes lorenzo. more of this hereafter."], ["sweet friends, your patience for my long abode. not i but my affairs have made you wait. when you shall please to play the thieves for wives, i'll watch as long for you then. approach. here dwells my father jew. ho! who's within?", "who are you? tell me for more certainty, albeit i'll swear that i do know your tongue.", "lorenzo, and thy love.", "lorenzo certain, and my love indeed for who love i so much? and now who knows but you, lorenzo, whether i am yours?", "heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.", "here, catch this casket. it is worth the pains. i am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me, for i am much ashamed of my exchange. but love is blind, and lovers cannot see the pretty follies that themselves commit, for if they could cupid himself would blush to see me thus transformd to a boy.", "descend, for you must be my torchbearer.", "what, must i hold a candle to my shames? they in themselves, good sooth, are too too light. why, 'tis an office of discovery, love. and i should be obscured."], ["so are you, sweet, even in the lovely garnish of a boy. but come at once, for the close night doth play the runaway, and we are stayed for at bassanio's feast.", "i will make fast the doors and gild myself with some more ducats, and be with you straight.", "now, by my hood, a gentle and no jew.", "beshrew me but i love her heartily. for she is wise, if i can judge of her. and fair she is, if that mine eyes be true. and true she is, as she hath proved herself. and therefore, like herself wise, fair and true shall she be placd in my constant soul.", "what, art thou come? on, gentlemen, away! our masquing mates by this time for us stay.", "who's there?", "signor antonio?"], ["fie, fie, gratiano! where are all the rest? 'tis nine o'clock. our friends all stay for you. no masque tonight. the wind is come about. bassanio presently will go aboard. i have sent twenty out to seek for you.", "i am glad on 't. i desire no more delight than to be under sail and gone tonight."], ["go draw aside the curtains and discover the several caskets to this noble prince.", "a curtain is drawn showing a gold, silver, and lead casket", "morocco now make your choice.", "the first, of gold, who this inscription bears: \"who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.\" the second, silver, which this promise carries: \"who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.\" this third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt: \"who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.\" how shall i know if i do choose the right?", "the one of them contains my picture, prince. if you choose that, then i am yours withal.", "some god direct my judgment! let me see. i will survey th' inscriptions back again. what says this leaden casket? \"who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.\" must give for what? for lead? hazard for lead? this casket threatens. men that hazard all do it in hope of fair advantages. a golden mind stoops not to shows of dross. i'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead. what says the silver with her virgin hue?"], ["\"who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.\" \"as much as he deserves!\" pause there, morocco, and weigh thy value with an even hand. if thou beest rated by thy estimation, thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough may not extend so far as to the lady, and yet to be afeard of my deserving were but a weak disabling of myself. as much as i deserve! why, that's the lady. i do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes, in graces, and in qualities of breeding. but more than these, in love i do deserve. what if i strayed no further, but chose here? let's see once more this saying graved in gold, \"who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.\" why, that's the lady. all the world desires her. from the four corners of the earth they come to kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing saint. the hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds of wide arabia are as thoroughfares now for princes to come view fair portia. the watery kingdom, whose ambitious head spits in the face of heaven, is no bar to stop the foreign spirits, but they come as o'er a brook to see fair portia. one of these three contains her heavenly picture. is 't like that lead contains her? 'twere damnation to think so base a thought. it were too gross to rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave. or shall i think in silver she's immured, being ten times undervalued to tried gold? o sinful thought! never so rich a gem was set in worse than gold. they have in england a coin that bears the figure of an angel stamped in gold, but that's insculped upon. but here an angel in a golden bed"], ["lies all within. deliver me the key. here do i choose, and thrive i as i may!", "morocco there, take it, prince. and if my form lie there then i am yours.", "o hell, what have we here? a carrion death, within whose empty eye there is a written scroll. i'll read the writing. \"all that glisters is not gold often have you heard that told. many a man his life hath sold but my outside to behold. gilded tombs do worms enfold. had you been as wise as bold, young in limbs, in judgment old, your answer had not been inscrolled. fare you well. your suit is cold cold, indeed, and labor lost.\" then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost! portia, adieu. i have too grieved a heart to take a tedious leave. thus losers part.", "a gentle riddance. draw the curtains, go. let all of his complexion choose me so."], ["why, man, i saw bassanio under sail. with him is gratiano gone along. and in their ship i am sure lorenzo is not.", "the villain jew with outcries raised the duke, who went with him to search bassanio's ship.", "he came too late. the ship was under sail. but there the duke was given to understand that in a gondola were seen together lorenzo and his amorous jessica. besides, antonio certified the duke they were not with bassanio in his ship.", "i never heard a passion so confused, so strange, outrageous, and so variable, as the dog jew did utter in the streets. \"my daughter! o my ducats! o my daughter, fled with a christian! o my christian ducats! justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter! a seald bag, two seald bags of ducats, of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter! and jewels two stones, two rich and precious stones stol'n by my daughter! justice, find the girl! she hath the stones upon her, and the ducats.\"", "why, all the boys in venice follow him, crying, \"his stones, his daughter, and his ducats!\""], ["let good antonio look he keep his day, or he shall pay for this.", "marry, well remembered. i reasoned with a frenchman yesterday, who told me, in the narrow seas that part the french and english, there miscarried a vessel of our country richly fraught. i thought upon antonio when he told me, and wished in silence that it were not his.", "you were best to tell antonio what you hear yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.", "a kinder gentleman treads not the earth. i saw bassanio and antonio part. bassanio told him he would make some speed of his return. he answered, \"do not so. slubber not business for my sake, bassanio but stay the very riping of the time. and for the jew's bond which he hath of me, let it not enter in your mind of love. be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts to courtship and such fair ostents of love as shall conveniently become you there.\" and even there, his eye being big with tears, turning his face, he put his hand behind him, and with affection wondrous sensible he wrung bassanio's hand. and so they parted."], ["i think he only loves the world for him. i pray thee, let us go and find him out and quicken his embracd heaviness with some delight or other.", "do we so."], ["quick, quick, i pray thee. draw the curtain straight. the prince of arragon hath ta'en his oath and comes to his election presently.", "behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince. if you choose that wherein i am contained, straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized. but if you fail, without more speech, my lord, you must be gone from hence immediately.", "i am enjoined by oath to observe three things: first, never to unfold to any one which casket 'twas i chose; next, if i fail of the right casket, never in my life to woo a maid in way of marriage; lastly, if i do fail in fortune of my choice, immediately to leave you and be gone.", "to these injunctions every one doth swear that comes to hazard for my worthless self.", "and so have i addressed me. fortune now to my heart's hope! gold, silver, and base lead. \"who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.\" you shall look fairer ere i give or hazard. what says the golden chest? ha, let me see. \"who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.\""], ["\"what many men desire\" that \"many\" may be meant by the fool multitude that choose by show, not learning more than the fond eye doth teach; which pries not to th' interior, but like the martlet builds in the weather on the outward wall, even in the force and road of casualty. i will not choose what many men desire because i will not jump with common spirits and rank me with the barbarous multitudes. why then, to thee, thou silver treasure house. tell me once more what title thou dost bear. \"who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.\" and well said too for who shall go about to cozen fortune and be honorable without the stamp of merit? let none presume to wear an undeservd dignity. oh, that estates, degrees and offices were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor were purchased by the merit of the wearer! how many then should cover that stand bare! how many be commanded that command! how much low peasantry would then be gleaned from the true seed of honor! and how much honor picked from the chaff and ruin of the times to be new varnished! well, but to my choice. \"who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.\" i will assume desert. give me a key for this, and instantly unlock my fortunes here.", "too long a pause for that which you find there."], ["what's here? the portrait of a blinking idiot presenting me a schedule! i will read it. how much unlike art thou to portia! how much unlike my hopes and my deservings! \"who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves\"! did i deserve no more than a fool's head? is that my prize? are my deserts no better?", "to offend and judge are distinct offices and of opposd natures.", "what is here? \"the fire seven times tried this, seven times tried that judgment is, that did never choose amiss. some there be that shadows kiss. such have but a shadow's bliss. there be fools alive, iwis, silvered o'er and so was this. take what wife you will to bed, i will ever be your head. so be gone. you are sped. still more fool i shall appear\" by the time i linger here. with one fool's head i came to woo, but i go away with two. sweet, adieu. i'll keep my oath patiently to bear my wroth.\""], ["thus hath the candle singed the moth. o these deliberate fools! when they do choose, they have the wisdom by their wit to lose.", "the ancient saying is no heresy. hanging and wiving goes by destiny.", "come, draw the curtain, nerissa.", "where is my lady?", "here. what would my lord?", "madam, there is alighted at your gate a young venetian, one that comes before to signify th' approaching of his lord, from whom he bringeth sensible regreets, to wit besides commends and courteous breath gifts of rich value. yet i have not seen so likely an ambassador of love. a day in april never came so sweet to show how costly summer was at hand, as this forespurrer comes before his lord.", "no more, i pray thee. i am half afeard thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee, thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him. come, come, nerissa, for i long to see quick cupid's post that comes so mannerly.", "bassanio, lord love, if thy will it be!"], ["now, what news on the rialto?", "why, yet it lives there unchecked that antonio hath a ship of rich lading wracked on the narrow seas. the goodwins i think they call the place a very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my gossip report be an honest woman of her word.", "i would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapped ginger or made her neighbors believe she wept for the death of a third husband. but it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the plain highway of talk, that the good antonio, the honest antonio oh, that i had a title good enough to keep his name company!", "come, the full stop.", "ha, what sayest thou? why, the end is he hath lost a ship.", "i would it might prove the end of his losses.", "let me say \"amen\" betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer, for here he comes in the likeness of a jew."], ["how now, shylock? what news among the merchants?", "you knew none so well, none so well as you of my daughter's flight.", "that's certain. i, for my part, knew the tailor that made the wings she flew withal.", "and shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was fledged, and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.", "she is damned for it.", "that's certain if the devil may be her judge.", "my own flesh and blood to rebel!", "out upon it, old carrion! rebels it at these years?", "i say my daughter is my flesh and blood.", "there is more difference between thy flesh and hers than between jet and ivory, more between your bloods than there is between red wine and rhenish. but tell us, do you hear whether antonio have had any loss at sea or no?"], ["there i have another bad match! a bankrupt, a prodigal who dare scarce show his head on the rialto, a beggar that was used to come so smug upon the mart. let him look to his bond. he was wont to call me usurer; let him look to his bond. he was wont to lend money for a christian courtesy; let him look to his bond.", "why, i am sure, if he forfeit thou wilt not take his flesh. what's that good for?", "to bait fish withal. if it will feed nothing else, it will feed my revenge. he hath disgraced me and hindered me half a million, laughed at my losses, mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies and what's his reason? i am a jew. hath not a jew eyes? hath not a jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer as a christian is? if you prick us, do we not bleed? if you tickle us, do we not laugh? if you poison us, do we not die? and if you wrong us, shall we not revenge? if we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in that. if a jew wrong a christian, what is his humility? revenge. if a christian wrong a jew, what should his sufferance be by christian example? why, revenge. the villainy you teach me i will execute and it shall go hard but i will better the instruction."], ["(to solanio and salarino) gentlemen, my master antonio is at his house and desires to speak with you both.", "we have been up and down to seek him.", "here comes another of the tribe. a third cannot be matched unless the devil himself turn jew.", "how now, tubal? what news from genoa? hast thou found my daughter?", "i often came where i did hear of her, but cannot find her.", "why, there, there, there, there! a diamond gone cost me two thousand ducats in frankfurt the curse never fell upon our nation till now! i never felt it till now two thousand ducats in that, and other precious, precious jewels. i would my daughter were dead at my foot and the jewels in her ear! would she were hearsed at my foot and the ducats in her coffin! no news of them? why, so. and i know not what's spent in the search. why thou, loss upon loss! the thief gone with so much, and so much to find the thief and no satisfaction, no revenge. nor no ill luck stirring but what lights o' my shoulders, no sighs but o' my breathing, no tears but o' my shedding."], ["yes, other men have ill luck too. antonio, as i heard in genoa", "what, what, what? ill luck, ill luck?", "hath an argosy cast away coming from tripolis.", "i thank god, i thank god! is 't true, is 't true?", "i spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wrack.", "i thank thee, good tubal. good news, good news! ha, ha, heard in genoa.", "your daughter spent in genoa, as i heard, in one night fourscore ducats.", "thou stickest a dagger in me. i shall never see my gold again. fourscore ducats at a sitting! fourscore ducats!", "there came divers of antonio's creditors in my company to venice that swear he cannot choose but break.", "i am very glad of it. i'll plague him. i'll torture him. i am glad of it.", "one of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey.", "out upon her! thou torturest me, tubal. it was my turquoise. i had it of leah when i was a bachelor. i would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys."], ["but antonio is certainly undone.", "nay, that's true, that's very true. go, tubal, fee me an officer. bespeak him a fortnight before. i will have the heart of him if he forfeit, for were he out of venice i can make what merchandise i will. go, go, tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. go, good tubal. at our synagogue, tubal."], ["bassanio i pray you, tarry. pause a day or two before you hazard, for in choosing wrong i lose your company. therefore forbear awhile. there's something tells me but it is not love i would not lose you, and you know yourself hate counsels not in such a quality. but lest you should not understand me well and yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought i would detain you here some month or two before you venture for me. i could teach you how to choose right, but i am then forsworn. so will i never be. so may you miss me. but if you do, you'll make me wish a sin, that i had been forsworn. beshrew your eyes, they have o'erlooked me and divided me. one half of me is yours, the other half yours mine own, i would say. but if mine, then yours, and so all yours. oh, these naughty times put bars between the owners and their rights! and so, though yours, not yours. prove it so. let fortune go to hell for it, not i. i speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time, to eke it and to draw it out in length, to stay you from election.", "let me choose, for as i am, i live upon the rack.", "upon the rack, bassanio? then confess what treason there is mingled with your love."], ["none but that ugly treason of mistrust which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love. there may as well be amity and life 'tween snow and fire, as treason and my love.", "ay, but i fear you speak upon the rack where men enforcd do speak anything.", "promise me life, and i'll confess the truth.", "well then, confess and live.", "\"confess and love\" had been the very sum of my confession. o happy torment, when my torturer doth teach me answers for deliverance! but let me to my fortune and the caskets.", "away, then. i am locked in one of them. if you do love me you will find me out. nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof. let music sound while he doth make his choice. then if he lose he makes a swanlike end, fading in music. that the comparison may stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream and watery deathbed for him. he may win, and what is music then? then music is even as the flourish when true subjects bow to a new-crownd monarch. such it is as are those dulcet sounds in break of day that creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear and summon him to marriage."], ["now he goes with no less presence but with much more love than young alcides, when he did redeem the virgin tribute paid by howling troy to the sea monster. i stand for sacrifice. the rest aloof are the dardanian wives, with bleard visages come forth to view the issue of th' exploit. go, hercules! live thou, i live. with much, much more dismay i view the fight than thou that makest the fray.", "", "reply, reply.", "", "ding, dong, bell."], ["so may the outward shows be least themselves. the world is still deceived with ornament. in law, what plea so tainted and corrupt but, being seasoned with a gracious voice, obscures the show of evil? in religion, what damnd error, but some sober brow will bless it and approve it with a text, hiding the grossness with fair ornament? there is no vice so simple but assumes some mark of virtue on his outward parts. how many cowards whose hearts are all as false as stairs of sand wear yet upon their chins the beards of hercules and frowning mars, who, inward searched, have livers white as milk, and these assume but valor's excrement to render them redoubted. look on beauty, and you shall see 'tis purchased by the weight, which therein works a miracle in nature, making them lightest that wear most of it. so are those crispd snaky golden locks which maketh such wanton gambols with the wind, upon supposd fairness, often known to be the dowry of a second head, the skull that bred them in the sepulcher. thus ornament is but the guild shore to a most dangerous sea, the beauteous scarf veiling an indian beauty in a word, the seeming truth which cunning times put on to entrap the wisest. therefore then, thou gaudy gold, hard food for midas, i will none of thee. nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge 'tween man and man. but thou, thou meagre lead, which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught, thy paleness moves me more than eloquence, and here choose i. joy be the consequence!"], ["how all the other passions fleet to air, as doubtful thoughts, and rash-embraced despair, and shuddering fear, and green-eyed jealousy! o love, be moderate. allay thy ecstasy. in measure rein thy joy. scant this excess. i feel too much thy blessing. make it less, for fear i surfeit.", "what find i here? fair portia's counterfeit! what demigod hath come so near creation? move these eyes? or whether, riding on the balls of mine, seem they in motion? here are severed lips, parted with sugar breath. so sweet a bar should sunder such sweet friends. here in her hairs, the painter plays the spider and hath woven a golden mesh t' entrap the hearts of men faster than gnats in cobwebs. but her eyes how could he see to do them? having made one, methinks it should have power to steal both his and leave itself unfurnished. yet look how far the substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow in underprizing it, so far this shadow doth limp behind the substance. here's the scroll, the continent and summary of my fortune. \"you that choose not by the view, chance as fair and choose as true. since this fortune falls to you, be content and seek no new. if you be well pleased with this and hold your fortune for your bliss, turn you where your lady is and claim her with a loving kiss.\""], ["a gentle scroll. fair lady, by your leave, i come by note to give and to receive. like one of two contending in a prize that thinks he hath done well in people's eyes, hearing applause and universal shout, giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt whether these pearls of praise be his or no so, thrice fair lady, stand i even so, as doubtful whether what i see be true until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.", "you see me, lord bassanio, where i stand such as i am. though for myself alone i would not be ambitious in my wish to wish myself much better, yet for you i would be trebled twenty times myself a thousand times more fair, ten thousand times more rich that only to stand high in your account i might in virtue, beauties, livings, friends exceed account. but the full sum of me is sum of something which, to term in gross, is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticd; happy in this she is not yet so old but she may learn. happier than this she is not bred so dull but she can learn. happiest of all is that her gentle spirit commits itself to yours to be directed as from her lord, her governor, her king. myself and what is mine to you and yours is now converted. but now i was the lord of this fair mansion, master of my servants, queen o'er myself. and even now, but now, this house, these servants, and this same myself are yours, my lord's. i give them with this ring, which when you part from, lose, or give away, let it presage the ruin of your love"], ["and be my vantage to exclaim on you. bassanio", "madam, you have bereft me of all words. only my blood speaks to you in my veins. and there is such confusion in my powers as after some oration fairly spoke by a belovd prince there doth appear among the buzzing pleasd multitude, where every something, being blent together, turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy, expressed and not expressed. but when this ring parts from this finger, then parts life from hence. o, then be bold to say bassanio's dead!", "my lord and lady, it is now our time, that have stood by and seen our wishes prosper, to cry, \"good joy, good joy, my lord and lady!\"", "my lord bassanio and my gentle lady, i wish you all the joy that you can wish, for i am sure you can wish none from me. and when your honors mean to solemnize the bargain of your faith, i do beseech you even at that time i may be married too.", "with all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.", "i thank your lordship, you have got me one. my eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours. you saw the mistress, i beheld the maid. you loved, i loved. for intermission no more pertains to me, my lord, than you. your fortune stood upon the casket there, and so did mine too, as the matter falls. for wooing here until i sweat again, and swearing till my very roof was dry with oaths of love, at last if promise last i got a promise of this fair one here to have her love, provided that your fortune achieved her mistress."], ["is this true, nerissa?", "madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.", "and do you, gratiano, mean good faith?", "yes, faith, my lord.", "our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.", "nerissa we'll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.", "what, and stake down?", "no, we shall ne'er win at that sport and stake down. but who comes here? lorenzo and his infidel? what, and my old venetian friend salerio?", "lorenzo and salerio, welcome hither, if that the youth of my new interest here have power to bid you welcome. portia by your leave, i bid my very friends and countrymen, sweet portia, welcome."], ["so do i, my lord. they are entirely welcome.", "bassanio i thank your honor. for my part, my lord, my purpose was not to have seen you here. but meeting with salerio by the way, he did entreat me, past all saying nay, to come with him along.", "i did, my lord. and i have reason for it. signor antonio commends him to you. bassanio", "ere i ope his letter, i pray you tell me how my good friend doth.", "not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind, nor well, unless in mind. his letter there will show you his estate.", "jessica nerissa, cheer yond stranger. bid her welcome. your hand, salerio. what's the news from venice? how doth that royal merchant, good antonio? i know he will be glad of our success. we are the jasons, we have won the fleece."], ["i would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.", "there are some shrewd contents in yond same paper that steals the color from bassanio's cheek. some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world could turn so much the constitution of any constant man. what, worse and worse? with leave, bassanio, i am half yourself, and i must freely have the half of anything that this same paper brings you.", "o sweet portia, here are a few of the unpleasant'st words that ever blotted paper. gentle lady, when i did first impart my love to you, i freely told you, all the wealth i had ran in my veins. i was a gentleman, and then i told you true. and yet, dear lady, rating myself at nothing, you shall see how much i was a braggart. when i told you my state was nothing, i should then have told you that i was worse than nothing, for indeed i have engaged myself to a dear friend, engaged my friend to his mere enemy to feed my means. here is a letter, lady, the paper as the body of my friend, and every word in it a gaping wound, issuing life blood. but is it true, salerio? have all his ventures failed? what, not one hit? from tripolis, from mexico and england, from lisbon, barbary, and india? and not one vessel 'scape the dreadful touch of merchant-marring rocks?"], ["not one, my lord. besides, it should appear that if he had the present money to discharge the jew, he would not take it. never did i know a creature that did bear the shape of man so keen and greedy to confound a man. he plies the duke at morning and at night, and doth impeach the freedom of the state if they deny him justice. twenty merchants, the duke himself, and the magnificoes of greatest port have all persuaded with him. but none can drive him from the envious plea of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.", "when i was with him i have heard him swear to tubal and to chus, his countrymen, that he would rather have antonio's flesh than twenty times the value of the sum that he did owe him. and i know, my lord, if law, authority, and power deny not, it will go hard with poor antonio.", "is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?", "the dearest friend to me, the kindest man, the best conditioned and unwearied spirit in doing courtesies, and one in whom the ancient roman honor more appears than any that draws breath in italy.", "what sum owes he the jew?", "for me, three thousand ducats."], ["what, no more? pay him six thousand and deface the bond! double six thousand, and then treble that, before a friend of this description shall lose a hair through bassanio's fault. first go with me to church and call me wife, and then away to venice to your friend. for never shall you lie by portia's side with an unquiet soul. you shall have gold to pay the petty debt twenty times over. when it is paid, bring your true friend along. my maid nerissa and myself meantime will live as maids and widows. come, away! for you shall hence upon your wedding day. bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer. since you are dear bought, i will love you dear. but let me hear the letter of your friend.", "\"sweet bassanio, my ships have all miscarried. my creditors grow cruel. my estate is very low. my bond to the jew is forfeit. and since in paying it, it is impossible i should live, all debts are cleared between you and i if i might but see you at my death. notwithstanding, use your pleasure. if your love do not persuade you to come, let not my letter.\"", "o love, dispatch all business and be gone!", "since i have your good leave to go away, i will make haste. but till i come again, no bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay, no rest be interposer 'twixt us twain."], ["jailer, look to him. tell not me of mercy. this is the fool that lent out money gratis. jailer, look to him.", "hear me yet, good shylock.", "i'll have my bond. speak not against my bond. i have sworn an oath that i will have my bond. thou calledst me dog before thou hadst a cause. but since i am a dog, beware my fangs. the duke shall grant me justice. i do wonder, thou naughty jailer, that thou art so fond to come abroad with him at his request.", "i pray thee, hear me speak.", "i'll have my bond. i will not hear thee speak. i'll have my bond, and therefore speak no more. i'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool to shake the head, relent and sigh, and yield to christian intercessors. follow not. i'll have no speaking. i will have my bond.", "it is the most impenetrable cur that ever kept with men."], ["let him alone. i'll follow him no more with bootless prayers. he seeks my life. his reason well i know. i oft delivered from his forfeitures many that have at times made moan to me. therefore he hates me.", "i am sure the duke will never grant this forfeiture to hold.", "the duke cannot deny the course of law. for the commodity that strangers have with us in venice, if it be denied, will much impeach the justice of his state, since that the trade and profit of the city consisteth of all nations. therefore go. these griefs and losses have so bated me, that i shall hardly spare a pound of flesh tomorrow to my bloody creditor. well, jailer, on. pray god bassanio come to see me pay his debt, and then i care not."], ["madam, although i speak it in your presence, you have a noble and a true conceit of godlike amity, which appears most strongly in bearing thus the absence of your lord. but if you knew to whom you show this honor, how true a gentleman you send relief, how dear a lover of my lord your husband, i know you would be prouder of the work than customary bounty can enforce you.", "i never did repent for doing good, nor shall not now; for in companions that do converse and waste the time together whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love, there must be needs a like proportion of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit, which makes me think that this antonio, being the bosom lover of my lord, must needs be like my lord. if it be so, how little is the cost i have bestowed in purchasing the semblance of my soul from out the state of hellish cruelty! this comes too near the praising of myself. therefore no more of it. hear other things. lorenzo, i commit into your hands the husbandry and manage of my house until my lord's return."], ["for mine own part, i have toward heaven breathed a secret vow to live in prayer and contemplation, only attended by nerissa here until her husband and my lord's return. there is a monastery two miles off, and there will we abide. i do desire you not to deny this imposition, the which my love and some necessity now lays upon you.", "madam, with all my heart. i shall obey you in all fair commands.", "my people do already know my mind and will acknowledge you and jessica in place of lord bassanio and myself. so fare you well till we shall meet again.", "fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!", "i wish your ladyship all heart's content.", "i thank you for your wish, and am well pleased to wish it back on you. fare you well, jessica.", "now, balthazar, as i have ever found thee honest true, so let me find thee still. balthazar take this same letter, and use thou all th' endeavour of a man in speed to padua. see thou render this into my cousin's hands, doctor bellario."], ["and look what notes and garments he doth give thee, bring them, i pray thee, with imagined speed unto the traject, to the common ferry which trades to venice. waste no time in words, but get thee gone. i shall be there before thee.", "madam, i go with all convenient speed.", "come on, nerissa, i have work in hand that you yet know not of. we'll see our husbands before they think of us.", "shall they see us?", "they shall, nerissa, but in such a habit that they shall think we are accomplishd with that we lack. i'll hold thee any wager, when we are both accoutred like young men, i'll prove the prettier fellow of the two, and wear my dagger with the braver grace, and speak between the change of man and boy with a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps into a manly stride, and speak of frays like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies, how honorable ladies sought my love, which i denying, they fell sick and died i could not do withal! then i'll repent and wish for all that, that i had not killed them. and twenty of these puny lies i'll tell, that men shall swear i have discontinued school above a twelvemonth. i have within my mind a thousand raw tricks of these bragging jacks which i will practice."], ["why, shall we turn to men?", "fie, what a question's that if thou wert near a lewd interpreter! but come, i'll tell thee all my whole device when i am in my coach, which stays for us at the park gate. and therefore haste away, for we must measure twenty miles today."], ["yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father are to be laid upon the children. therefore i promise ye i fear you. i was always plain with you, and so now i speak my agitation of the matter. therefore be o' good cheer, for truly i think you are damned. there is but one hope in it that can do you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope neither.", "and what hope is that, i pray thee?", "marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are not the jew's daughter.", "that were a kind of bastard hope indeed. so the sins of my mother should be visited upon me.", "truly then i fear you are damned both by father and mother. thus when i shun scylla your father, i fall into charybdis your mother. well, you are gone both ways.", "i shall be saved by my husband. he hath made me a christian.", "truly, the more to blame he. we were christians eno' before, e'en as many as could well live one by another. this making christians will raise the price of hogs. if we grow all to be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals for money."], ["i'll tell my husband, launcelot, what you say. here he comes.", "i shall grow jealous of you shortly, launcelot, if you thus get my wife into corners.", "nay, you need not fear us, lorenzo. launcelot and i are out. he tells me flatly there is no mercy for me in heaven because i am a jew's daughter, and he says you are no good member of the commonwealth, for in converting jews to christians you raise the price of pork.", "i shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you can the getting up of the negro's belly. the moor is with child by you, launcelot.", "it is much that the moor should be more than reason. but if she be less than an honest woman, she is indeed more than i took her for.", "how every fool can play upon the word! i think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none only but parrots. go in, sirrah. bid them prepare for dinner.", "that is done, sir. they have all stomachs."], ["goodly lord, what a wit-snapper are you! then bid them prepare dinner.", "that is done too, sir. only \"cover!\" is the word.", "will you cover then, sir?", "not so, sir, neither. i know my duty.", "yet more quarreling with occasion! wilt thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an instant? i pray thee, understand a plain man in his plain meaning. go to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to dinner.", "for the table, sir, it shall be served in. for the meat, sir, it shall be covered. for your coming in to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humours and conceits shall govern.", "o dear discretion, how his words are suited! the fool hath planted in his memory an army of good words, and i do know a many fools that stand in better place, garnished like him, that for a tricksy word defy the matter. how cheerest thou, jessica? and now, good sweet, say thy opinion. how dost thou like the lord bassanio's wife?"], ["past all expressing. it is very meet the lord bassanio live an upright life, for having such a blessing in his lady, he finds the joys of heaven here on earth. and if on earth he do not merit it, in reason he should never come to heaven. why, if two gods should play some heavenly match and on the wager lay two earthly women, and portia one, there must be something else pawned with the other, for the poor rude world hath not her fellow.", "even such a husband hast thou of me as she is for a wife.", "nay, but ask my opinion too of that!", "i will anon. first let us go to dinner.", "nay, let me praise you while i have a stomach.", "no, pray thee, let it serve for table talk. then howsome'er thou speak'st 'mong other things i shall digest it.", "well, i'll set you forth."], ["what, is antonio here?", "ready, so please your grace.", "i am sorry for thee. thou art come to answer a stony adversary, an inhuman wretch uncapable of pity, void and empty from any dram of mercy.", "i have heard your grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify his rigorous course. but since he stands obdurate and that no lawful means can carry me out of his envy's reach, i do oppose my patience to his fury, and am armed to suffer with a quietness of spirit the very tyranny and rage of his.", "go, one, and call the jew into the court.", "he is ready at the door. he comes, my lord."], ["make room, and let him stand before our face. shylock, the world thinks, and i think so too, that thou but lead'st this fashion of thy malice to the last hour of act, and then 'tis thought thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange than is thy strange apparent cruelty, and where thou now exacts the penalty which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture but touched with human gentleness and love, forgive a moiety of the principal, glancing an eye of pity on his losses that have of late so huddled on his back eno' to press a royal merchant down and pluck commiseration of his state from brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint, from stubborn turks and tartars never trained to offices of tender courtesy. we all expect a gentle answer, jew.", "i have possessed your grace of what i purpose, and by our holy sabbath have i sworn to have the due and forfeit of my bond. if you deny it, let the danger light upon your charter and your city's freedom. you'll ask me why i rather choose to have a weight of carrion flesh than to receive three thousand ducats. i'll not answer that but say it is my humour. is it answered? what if my house be troubled with a rat and i be pleased to give ten thousand ducats to have it baned? what, are you answered yet?"], ["some men there are love not a gaping pig, some that are mad if they behold a cat, and others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose, cannot contain their urine. for affection, mistress of passion, sways it to the mood of what it likes or loathes. now, for your answer: as there is no firm reason to be rendered why he cannot abide a gaping pig; why he, a harmless necessary cat; why he, a woollen bagpipe, but of force must yield to such inevitable shame as to offend, himself being offended so can i give no reason, nor i will not (more than a lodged hate and a certain loathing i bear antonio), that i follow thus a losing suit against him. are you answered?", "this is no answer, thou unfeeling man, to excuse the current of thy cruelty.", "i am not bound to please thee with my answers.", "do all men kill the things they do not love?", "hates any man the thing he would not kill?", "every offense is not a hate at first.", "what, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?", "bassanio i pray you, think you question with the jew? you may as well go stand upon the beach and bid the main flood bate his usual height. you may as well use question with the wolf why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb."], ["you may as well forbid the mountain pines to wag their high tops and to make no noise when they are fretten with the gusts of heaven. you may as well do anything most hard, as seek to soften that than which what's harder? his jewish heart. therefore i do beseech you make no more offers, use no farther means, but with all brief and plain conveniency let me have judgment and the jew his will.", "shylock for thy three thousand ducats here is six.", "if every ducat in six thousand ducats were in six parts, and every part a ducat, i would not draw them. i would have my bond.", "how shalt thou hope for mercy, rendering none?", "what judgment shall i dread, doing no wrong? you have among you many a purchased slave, which like your asses and your dogs and mules you use in abject and in slavish parts because you bought them. shall i say to you, \"let them be free! marry them to your heirs! why sweat they under burdens? let their beds be made as soft as yours and let their palates be seasoned with such viands\"? you will answer, \"the slaves are ours.\" so do i answer you. the pound of flesh which i demand of him is dearly bought. 'tis mine and i will have it. if you deny me, fie upon your law there is no force in the decrees of venice. i stand for judgment. answer, shall i have it?"], ["upon my power i may dismiss this court, unless bellario, a learnd doctor, whom i have sent for to determine this, come here today.", "my lord, here stays without a messenger with letters from the doctor, new come from padua.", "bring us the letter. call the messenger.", "good cheer, antonio! what, man, courage yet! the jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all, ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.", "i am a tainted wether of the flock, meetest for death. the weakest kind of fruit drops earliest to the ground, and so let me. you cannot better be employed, bassanio, than to live still and write mine epitaph.", "came you from padua, from bellario?", "from both, my lord. bellario greets your grace. duke", "shylock why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?"], ["to cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.", "not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh jew, thou makest thy knife keen. but no metal can no, not the hangman's axe bear half the keenness of thy sharp envy. can no prayers pierce thee?", "no, none that thou hast wit enough to make.", "o, be thou damned, inexecrable dog, and for thy life let justice be accused! thou almost makest me waver in my faith to hold opinion with pythagoras that souls of animals infuse themselves into the trunks of men. thy currish spirit governed a wolf who, hanged for human slaughter, even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet, and whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam infused itself in thee, for thy desires are wolvish, bloody, starved, and ravenous.", "till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond, thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud. repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall to cureless ruin. i stand here for law.", "this letter from bellario doth commend a young and learnd doctor to our court. where is he?", "he attendeth here hard by to know your answer whether you'll admit him."], ["with all my heart. some three or four of you go give him courteous conduct to this place. meantime the court shall hear bellario's letter. \"your grace shall understand that at the receipt of your letter i am very sick, but in the instant that your messenger came, in loving visitation was with me a young doctor of rome. his name is balthazar. i acquainted him with the cause in controversy between the jew and antonio the merchant. we turned o'er many books together. he is furnished with my opinion, which bettered with his own learning, the greatness whereof i cannot enough commend comes with him at my importunity to fill up your grace's request in my stead.i beseech you, let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation, for i never knew so young a body with so old a head. i leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his commendation.\"", "you hear the learned bellario, what he writes. and here i take it is the doctor come. give me your hand. come you from old bellario?", "i did, my lord.", "you are welcome. take your place. are you acquainted with the difference that holds this present question in the court?", "i am informd thoroughly of the cause. which is the merchant here, and which the jew?"], ["antonio and old shylock, both stand forth.", "is your name shylock?", "shylock is my name.", "of a strange nature is the suit you follow, yet in such rule that the venetian law cannot impugn you as you do proceed. antonio you stand within his danger, do you not?", "ay, so he says.", "do you confess the bond?", "i do.", "then must the jew be merciful.", "on what compulsion must i? tell me that.", "the quality of mercy is not strained. it droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven upon the place beneath. it is twice blessed: it blesseth him that gives and him that takes. 'tis mightiest in the mightiest. it becomes the thrond monarch better than his crown. his scepter shows the force of temporal power, the attribute to awe and majesty wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings, but mercy is above this sceptered sway. it is enthrond in the hearts of kings. it is an attribute to god himself. and earthly power doth then show likest god's when mercy seasons justice. therefore, jew,"], ["though justice be thy plea, consider this that in the course of justice none of us should see salvation. we do pray for mercy, and that same prayer doth teach us all to render the deeds of mercy. i have spoke thus much to mitigate the justice of thy plea, which if thou follow, this strict court of venice must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there.", "my deeds upon my head. i crave the law, the penalty, and forfeit of my bond.", "is he not able to discharge the money?", "yes, here i tender it for him in the court yea, twice the sum. if that will not suffice, i will be bound to pay it ten times o'er, on forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart. if this will not suffice, it must appear that malice bears down truth. duke and i beseech you, wrest once the law to your authority. to do a great right, do a little wrong, and curb this cruel devil of his will.", "it must not be. there is no power in venice can alter a decree establishd. 'twill be recorded for a precedent, and many an error by the same example will rush into the state. it cannot be.", "a daniel come to judgment, yea, a daniel! o wise young judge, how i do honor thee!"], ["i pray you, let me look upon the bond.", "portia here 'tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.", "shylock, there's thrice thy money offered thee.", "an oath, an oath, i have an oath in heaven. shall i lay perjury upon my soul? no, not for venice.", "why, this bond is forfeit! and lawfully by this the jew may claim a pound of flesh to be by him cut off nearest the merchant's heart. be merciful. take thrice thy money. bid me tear the bond.", "when it is paid according to the tenor. it doth appear you are a worthy judge. you know the law. your exposition hath been most sound. i charge you by the law, whereof you are a well-deserving pillar, proceed to judgment. by my soul i swear there is no power in the tongue of man to alter me. i stay here on my bond.", "most heartily i do beseech the court to give the judgment.", "why then, thus it is: you must prepare your bosom for his knife.", "o noble judge! o excellent young man!"], ["for the intent and purpose of the law hath full relation to the penalty, which here appeareth due upon the bond.", "'tis very true. o wise and upright judge! how much more elder art thou than thy looks!", "antonio therefore lay bare your bosom.", "ay, his breast. so says the bond. doth it not, noble judge? \"nearest his heart\" those are the very words.", "it is so. are there balance here to weigh the flesh?", "i have them ready.", "have by some surgeon, shylock, on your charge, to stop his wounds lest he do bleed to death.", "is it so nominated in the bond?", "it is not so expressed, but what of that? 'twere good you do so much for charity.", "i cannot find it. 'tis not in the bond.", "antonio you, merchant, have you any thing to say?", "but little. i am armed and well prepared. give me your hand, bassanio. fare you well."], ["grieve not that i am fall'n to this for you, for herein fortune shows herself more kind than is her custom. it is still her use to let the wretched man outlive his wealth, to view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow an age of poverty from which lingering penance of such misery doth she cut me off. commend me to your honorable wife. tell her the process of antonio's end. say how i loved you. speak me fair in death. and when the tale is told, bid her be judge whether bassanio had not once a love. repent but you that you shall lose your friend, and he repents not that he pays your debt. for if the jew do cut but deep enough, i'll pay it presently with all my heart.", "antonio, i am married to a wife which is as dear to me as life itself. but life itself, my wife, and all the world are not with me esteemed above thy life. i would lose all ay, sacrifice them all here to this devil to deliver you.", "your wife would give you little thanks for that if she were by to hear you make the offer.", "i have a wife, whom i protest i love. i would she were in heaven, so she could entreat some power to change this currish jew.", "'tis well you offer it behind her back. the wish would make else an unquiet house."], ["these be the christian husbands. i have a daughter. would any of the stock of barabbas had been her husband rather than a christian! we trifle time. i pray thee, pursue sentence.", "a pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine. the court awards it, and the law doth give it.", "most rightful judge!", "and you must cut this flesh from off his breast. the law allows it, and the court awards it.", "most learnd judge, a sentence! come, prepare.", "tarry a little. there is something else. this bond doth give thee here no jot of blood. the words expressly are \"a pound of flesh.\" take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh, but in the cutting it if thou dost shed one drop of christian blood, thy lands and goods are by the laws of venice confiscate unto the state of venice.", "o upright judge! mark, jew. o learnd judge!", "is that the law?", "thyself shalt see the act. for as thou urgest justice, be assured thou shalt have justice more than thou desirest."], ["o learnd judge! mark, jew, a learnd judge!", "i take this offer then: pay the bond thrice and let the christian go.", "here is the money.", "soft! the jew shall have all justice. soft, no haste. he shall have nothing but the penalty.", "o jew! an upright judge, a learnd judge!", "therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh. shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more but just a pound of flesh. if thou takest more or less than a just pound, be it but so much as makes it light or heavy in the substance or the division of the twentieth part of one poor scruple nay, if the scale do turn but in the estimation of a hair, thou diest and all thy goods are confiscate.", "a second daniel! a daniel, jew! now, infidel, i have you on the hip.", "why doth the jew pause? take thy forfeiture.", "give me my principal, and let me go.", "i have it ready for thee. here it is."], ["he hath refused it in the open court. he shall have merely justice and his bond.", "a daniel, still say i, a second daniel! i thank thee, jew, for teaching me that word.", "shall i not have barely my principal?", "thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture to be so taken at thy peril, jew.", "why then, the devil give him good of it! i'll stay no longer question.", "tarry, jew. the law hath yet another hold on you. it is enacted in the laws of venice, if it be proved against an alien that by direct or indirect attempts he seek the life of any citizen, the party 'gainst the which he doth contrive shall seize one half his goods. the other half comes to the privy coffer of the state, and the offender's life lies in the mercy of the duke only 'gainst all other voice. in which predicament i say thou stand'st, for it appears by manifest proceeding that indirectly and directly too thou hast contrived against the very life of the defendant, and thou hast incurred the danger formerly by me rehearsed. down, therefore, and beg mercy of the duke."], ["beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself, and yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state, thou hast not left the value of a cord. therefore thou must be hanged at the state's charge.", "that thou shalt see the difference of our spirit, i pardon thee thy life before thou ask it. for half thy wealth, it is antonio's. the other half comes to the general state, which humbleness may drive unto a fine.", "ay, for the state, not for antonio.", "nay, take my life and all. pardon not that. you take my house when you do take the prop that doth sustain my house. you take my life when you do take the means whereby i live.", "what mercy can you render him, antonio?", "a halter gratis, nothing else, for god's sake.", "so please my lord the duke and all the court, to quit the fine for one half of his goods i am content, so he will let me have the other half in use to render it upon his death unto the gentleman that lately stole his daughter. two things provided more: that for this favor he presently become a christian; the other, that he do record a gift here in the court, of all he dies possessed, unto his son lorenzo and his daughter."], ["he shall do this, or else i do recant the pardon that i late pronouncd here.", "art thou contented, jew? what dost thou say?", "i am content.", "nerissa clerk, draw a deed of gift.", "i pray you, give me leave to go from hence. i am not well. send the deed after me, and i will sign it.", "get thee gone, but do it.", "shylock in christening shalt thou have two godfathers. had i been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more to bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.", "portia sir, i entreat you home with me to dinner.", "i humbly do desire your grace of pardon. i must away this night toward padua, and it is meet i presently set forth.", "i am sorry that your leisure serves you not. antonio, gratify this gentleman, for in my mind you are much bound to him."], ["portia most worthy gentleman, i and my friend have by your wisdom been this day acquitted of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof three thousand ducats due unto the jew we freely cope your courteous pains withal.", "and stand indebted, over and above, in love and service to you evermore.", "he is well paid that is well satisfied. and i, delivering you, am satisfied, and therein do account myself well paid. my mind was never yet more mercenary. i pray you, know me when we meet again. i wish you well, and so i take my leave.", "dear sir, of force i must attempt you further. take some remembrance of us as a tribute, not as a fee. grant me two things, i pray you: not to deny me, and to pardon me.", "you press me far and therefore i will yield. antonio give me your gloves. i'll wear them for your sake. bassanio and for your love, i'll take this ring from you. do not draw back your hand. i'll take no more, and you in love shall not deny me this.", "this ring, good sir alas, it is a trifle. i will not shame myself to give you this.", "i will have nothing else but only this. and now methinks i have a mind to it."], ["there's more depends on this than on the value. the dearest ring in venice will i give you, and find it out by proclamation. only for this, i pray you, pardon me.", "i see, sir, you are liberal in offers. you taught me first to beg, and now methinks you teach me how a beggar should be answered.", "good sir, this ring was given me by my wife. and when she put it on, she made me vow that i should neither sell nor give nor lose it.", "that 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts. an if your wife be not a madwoman, and know how well i have deserved the ring, she would not hold out enemy forever for giving it to me. well, peace be with you.", "my lord bassanio, let him have the ring. let his deservings and my love withal be valued against your wife's commandment.", "gratiano go, gratiano, run and overtake him. give him the ring and bring him, if thou canst, unto antonio's house. away, make haste.", "come, you and i will thither presently. and in the morning early will we both fly toward belmont. come, antonio."], ["inquire the jew's house out. give him this deed, and let him sign it. we'll away tonight, and be a day before our husbands home. this deed will be well welcome to lorenzo.", "portia bassanio fair sir, you are well o'erta'en. my lord bassanio upon more advice hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat your company at dinner.", "that cannot be. his ring i do accept most thankfully. and so i pray you tell him. furthermore, i pray you show my youth old shylock's house.", "that will i do.", "portia sir, i would speak with you. portia i'll see if i can get my husband's ring, which i did make him swear to keep for ever.", "nerissa thou mayst, i warrant. we shall have old swearing that they did give the rings away to men. but we'll outface them, and outswear them too."], ["away, make haste. thou know'st where i will tarry.", "gratiano come, good sir. will you show me to this house?"], ["the moon shines bright. in such a night as this, when the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees and they did make no noise, in such a night troilus methinks mounted the trojan walls and sighed his soul toward the grecian tents where cressid lay that night.", "in such a night did thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew and saw the lion's shadow ere himself and ran dismayed away.", "in such a night stood dido with a willow in her hand upon the wild sea banks, and waft her love to come again to carthage.", "in such a night medea gathered the enchanted herbs that did renew old son."], ["in such a night did jessica steal from the wealthy jew, and with an unthrift love did run from venice as far as belmont.", "in such a night did young lorenzo swear he loved her well, stealing her soul with many vows of faith, and ne'er a true one.", "in such a night did pretty jessica, like a little shrew, slander her love, and he forgave it her.", "i would outnight you, did nobody come. but, hark, i hear the footing of a man.", "who comes so fast in silence of the night?", "a friend.", "a friend? what friend? your name, i pray you, friend?", "stephano is my name, and i bring word my mistress will before the break of day be here at belmont. she doth stray about by holy crosses, where she kneels and prays for happy wedlock hours.", "who comes with her?"], ["none but a holy hermit and her maid. i pray you, is my master yet returned?", "he is not, nor we have not heard from him. but go we in, i pray thee, jessica, and ceremoniously let us prepare some welcome for the mistress of the house.", "sola, sola! wo, ha, ho! sola, sola!", "who calls?", "sola! did you see master lorenzo? master lorenzo, sola, sola!", "leave holloaing, man. here.", "sola! where, where?", "here.", "tell him there's a post come from my master with his horn full of good news. my master will be here ere morning.", "sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming. and yet no matter. why should we go in? my friend stephano, signify, i pray you, within the house, your mistress is at hand. and bring your music forth into the air."], ["how sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank! here will we sit and let the sounds of music creep in our ears. soft stillness and the night become the touches of sweet harmony. sit, jessica. look how the floor of heaven is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold. there's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st but in his motion like an angel sings, still choiring to the young-eyed cherubins. such harmony is in immortal souls, but whilst this muddy vesture of decay doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.", "come ho, and wake diana with a hymn! with sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear, and draw her home with music.", "i am never merry when i hear sweet music.", "the reason is your spirits are attentive. for do but note a wild and wanton herd, or race of youthful and unhandled colts, fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud, which is the hot condition of their blood if they but hear perchance a trumpet sound, or any air of music touch their ears, you shall perceive them make a mutual stand, their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze by the sweet power of music."], ["therefore the poet did feign that orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage, but music for the time doth change his nature. the man that hath no music in himself, nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds, is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils. the motions of his spirit are dull as night, and his affections dark as erebus. let no such man be trusted. mark the music.", "that light we see is burning in my hall. how far that little candle throws his beams! so shines a good deed in a naughty world.", "when the moon shone we did not see the candle.", "so doth the greater glory dim the less. a substitute shines brightly as a king until a king be by, and then his state empties itself, as doth an inland brook into the main of waters. music, hark.", "it is your music, madam, of the house.", "nothing is good, i see, without respect. methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.", "silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.", "the crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark when neither is attended, and i think the nightingale, if she should sing by day when every goose is cackling, would be thought no better a musician than the wren. how many things by season seasoned are to their right praise and true perfection! peace! how the moon sleeps with endymion and would not be awaked."], ["that is the voice, or i am much deceived, of portia.", "he knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo by the bad voice.", "dear lady, welcome home.", "we have been praying for our husbands' welfare, which speed, we hope, the better for our words. are they returned?", "madam, they are not yet, but there is come a messenger before to signify their coming.", "go in, nerissa. give order to my servants that they take no note at all of our being absent hence. nor you, lorenzo. jessica, nor you."], ["your husband is at hand. i hear his trumpet. we are no tell-tales, madam. fear you not.", "this night methinks is but the daylight sick. it looks a little paler. 'tis a day such as the day is when the sun is hid.", "portia we should hold day with the antipodes, if you would walk in absence of the sun.", "let me give light, but let me not be light. for a light wife doth make a heavy husband, and never be bassanio so for me. but god sort all! you are welcome home, my lord.", "i thank you, madam. give welcome to my friend. this is the man, this is antonio, to whom i am so infinitely bound.", "you should in all sense be much bound to him. for as i hear he was much bound for you.", "no more than i am well acquitted of.", "sir, you are very welcome to our house. it must appear in other ways than words, therefore i scant this breathing courtesy."], ["nerissa by yonder moon i swear you do me wrong. in faith, i gave it to the judge's clerk. would he were gelt that had it, for my part, since you do take it, love, so much at heart.", "a quarrel, ho, already? what's the matter?", "about a hoop of gold, a paltry ring that she did give me, whose posy was for all the world like cutler's poetry upon a knife, \"love me and leave me not.\"", "what talk you of the posy or the value? you swore to me when i did give it you that you would wear it till your hour of death, and that it should lie with you in your grave. though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths, you should have been respective and have kept it. gave it a judge's clerk! no, god's my judge. the clerk will ne'er wear hair on 's face that had it.", "he will, an if he live to be a man.", "ay, if a woman live to be a man.", "now, by this hand, i gave it to a youth, a kind of boy, a little scrubbd boy no higher than thyself, the judge's clerk, a prating boy that begged it as a fee. i could not for my heart deny it him.", "you were to blame, i must be plain with you, to part so slightly with your wife's first gift, a thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger and so riveted with faith unto your flesh."], ["i gave my love a ring and made him swear never to part with it. and here he stands. i dare be sworn for him he would not leave it nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth that the world masters. now in faith, gratiano, you give your wife too unkind a cause of grief. an 'twere to me, i should be mad at it.", "why, i were best to cut my left hand off and swear i lost the ring defending it.", "my lord bassanio gave his ring away unto the judge that begged it and indeed deserved it too. and then the boy, his clerk, that took some pains in writing, he begged mine. and neither man nor master would take aught but the two rings.", "what ring gave you my lord? not that, i hope, which you received of me.", "if i could add a lie unto a fault i would deny it. but you see my finger hath not the ring upon it. it is gone.", "even so void is your false heart of truth. by heaven, i will ne'er come in your bed until i see the ring.", "gratiano nor i in yours till i again see mine."], ["sweet portia, if you did know to whom i gave the ring, if you did know for whom i gave the ring, and would conceive for what i gave the ring, and how unwillingly i left the ring when naught would be accepted but the ring, you would abate the strength of your displeasure.", "if you had known the virtue of the ring, or half her worthiness that gave the ring, or your own honor to contain the ring, you would not then have parted with the ring. what man is there so much unreasonable, if you had pleased to have defended it with any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty to urge the thing held as a ceremony? nerissa teaches me what to believe. i'll die for 't but some woman had the ring.", "no, by my honor, madam, by my soul, no woman had it but a civil doctor, which did refuse three thousand ducats of me and begged the ring, the which i did deny him and suffered him to go displeased away even he that did uphold the very life of my dear friend. what should i say, sweet lady? i was enforced to send it after him. i was beset with shame and courtesy. my honor would not let ingratitude so much besmear it. pardon me, good lady, for by these blessd candles of the night, had you been there i think you would have begged the ring of me to give the worthy doctor."], ["let not that doctor e'er come near my house! since he hath got the jewel that i loved, and that which you did swear to keep for me, i will become as liberal as you. i'll not deny him anything i have, no, not my body, nor my husband's bed. know him i shall, i am well sure of it. lie not a night from home. watch me like argus. if you do not, if i be left alone, now, by mine honor which is yet mine own i'll have that doctor for my bedfellow.", "gratiano and i his clerk. therefore be well advised how you do leave me to mine own protection.", "well, do you so, let not me take him then. for if i do i'll mar the young clerk's pen.", "i am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.", "sir, grieve not you. you are welcome notwithstanding.", "portia, forgive me this enforcd wrong, and in the hearing of these many friends i swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes wherein i see myself", "mark you but that! in both my eyes he doubly sees himself in each eye, one. swear by your double self, and there's an oath of credit!"], ["nay, but hear me. pardon this fault, and by my soul i swear i never more will break an oath with thee.", "i once did lend my body for his wealth, which but for him that had your husband's ring had quite miscarried. i dare be bound again, my soul upon the forfeit, that your lord will never more break faith advisedly.", "antonio then you shall be his surety. give him this, and bid him keep it better than the other.", "bassanio portia' here, lord bassanio. swear to keep this ring.", "by heaven, it is the same i gave the doctor!", "i had it of him. pardon me, bassanio, for by this ring, the doctor lay with me.", "and pardon me, my gentle gratiano, for that same scrubbd boy, the doctor's clerk, in lieu of this, last night did lie with me.", "why, this is like the mending of highways in summer where the ways are fair enough! what, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?"], ["speak not so grossly. you are all amazed. here is a letter. read it at your leisure. it comes from padua, from bellario. there you shall find that portia was the doctor, nerissa there her clerk. lorenzo here shall witness i set forth as soon as you, and even but now returned. i have not yet entered my house. antonio, you are welcome. and i have better news in store for you than you expect. antonio unseal this letter soon. there you shall find three of your argosies are richly come to harbor suddenly. you shall not know by what strange accident i chancd on this letter.", "i am dumb.", "portia were you the doctor and i knew you not?", "nerissa were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?", "ay, but the clerk that never means to do it unless he live until he be a man.", "portia sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow. when i am absent then lie with my wife.", "sweet lady, you have given me life and living. for here i read for certain that my ships are safely come to road."], ["how now, lorenzo? my clerk hath some good comforts too for you.", "ay, and i'll give them him without a fee. lorenzo there do i give to you and jessica, from the rich jew, a special deed of gift, after his death of all he dies possessed of.", "fair ladies, you drop manna in the way of starvd people.", "it is almost morning, and yet i am sure you are not satisfied of these events at full. let us go in, and charge us there upon interr'gatories, and we will answer all things faithfully.", "let it be so. the first interr'gatory that my nerissa shall be sworn on is whether till the next night she had rather stay, or go to bed now, being two hours to day. but were the day come, i should wish it dark, that i were couching with the doctor's clerk. well, while i live i'll fear no other thing so sore as keeping safe nerissa's ring."]], [["now, fair hippolyta, our nuptial hour draws on apace. four happy days bring in another moon. but oh, methinks how slow this old moon wanes! she lingers my desires, like to a stepdame or a dowager long withering out a young man's revenue.", "four days will quickly steep themselves in night. four nights will quickly dream away the time. and then the moon, like to a silver bow new bent in heaven, shall behold the night of our solemnities.", "go, philostrate, stir up the athenian youth to merriments. awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth. turn melancholy forth to funerals. the pale companion is not for our pomp.", "hippolyta, i wooed thee with my sword and won thy love doing thee injuries. but i will wed thee in another key, with pomp, with triumph, and with reveling.", "happy be theseus, our renownd duke."], ["thanks, good egeus. what's the news with thee?", "full of vexation come i with complaint against my child, my daughter hermia. stand forth, demetrius. my noble lord, this man hath my consent to marry her. stand forth, lysander. and my gracious duke, this man hath bewitched the bosom of my child. thou, thou, lysander, thou hast given her rhymes, and interchanged love tokens with my child. thou hast by moonlight at her window sung with feigning voice verses of feigning love, and stol'n the impression of her fantasy with bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits, knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats messengers of strong prevailment in unhardened youth. with cunning hast thou filched my daughter's heart, turned her obedience (which is due to me) to stubborn harshness. and, my gracious duke, be it so she will not here before your grace consent to marry with demetrius, i beg the ancient privilege of athens. as she is mine, i may dispose of her which shall be either to this gentleman or to her death according to our law immediately provided in that case.", "what say you, hermia? be advised, fair maid: to you your father should be as a god, one that composed your beauties, yea, and one to whom you are but as a form in wax, by him imprinted and within his power to leave the figure or disfigure it. demetrius is a worthy gentleman."], ["so is lysander.", "in himself he is. but in this kind, wanting your father's voice, the other must be held the worthier.", "i would my father looked but with my eyes.", "rather your eyes must with his judgment look.", "i do entreat your grace to pardon me. i know not by what power i am made bold nor how it may concern my modesty in such a presence here to plead my thoughts, but i beseech your grace that i may know the worst that may befall me in this case, if i refuse to wed demetrius.", "either to die the death or to abjure forever the society of men. therefore, fair hermia, question your desires. know of your youth. examine well your blood whether, if you yield not to your father's choice, you can endure the livery of a nun, for aye to be in shady cloister mewed, to live a barren sister all your life, chanting faint hymns to the cold, fruitless moon. thrice-blessd they that master so their blood to undergo such maiden pilgrimage. but earthlier happy is the rose distilled than that which, withering on the virgin thorn, grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness."], ["so will i grow, so live, so die, my lord, ere i will yield my virgin patent up unto his lordship, whose unwishd yoke my soul consents not to give sovereignty.", "take time to pause, and by the next new moon the sealing day betwixt my love and me for everlasting bond of fellowship upon that day either prepare to die for disobedience to your father's will, or else to wed demetrius, as he would, or on diana's altar to protest for aye austerity and single life.", "relent, sweet hermia and, lysander, yield thy crazd title to my certain right.", "you have her father's love, demetrius. let me have hermia's. do you marry him.", "scornful lysander, true, he hath my love, and what is mine my love shall render him. and she is mine, and all my right of her i do estate unto demetrius.", "theseus i am, my lord, as well derived as he, as well possessed. my love is more than his. my fortunes every way as fairly ranked, (if not with vantage) as demetrius'. and which is more than all these boasts can be i am beloved of beauteous hermia. why should not i then prosecute my right? demetrius, i'll avouch it to his head, made love to nedar's daughter, helena, and won her soul. and she, sweet lady, dotes, devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry upon this spotted and inconstant man."], ["i must confess that i have heard so much and with demetrius thought to have spoke thereof, but being overfull of self-affairs, my mind did lose it. but, demetrius, come. and come, egeus. you shall go with me. i have some private schooling for you both. for you, fair hermia, look you arm yourself to fit your fancies to your father's will, or else the law of athens yields you up (which by no means we may extenuate) to death, or to a vow of single life. come, my hippolyta. what cheer, my love? demetrius and egeus, go along. i must employ you in some business against our nuptial and confer with you of something nearly that concerns yourselves.", "with duty and desire we follow you.", "how now, my love? why is your cheek so pale? how chance the roses there do fade so fast?", "belike for want of rain, which i could well beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.", "ay me! for aught that i could ever read, could ever hear by tale or history, the course of true love never did run smooth. but either it was different in blood"], ["o cross! too high to be enthralled to low.", "or else misgraffd in respect of years", "o spite! too old to be engaged to young.", "or else it stood upon the choice of friends", "o hell, to choose love by another's eyes!", "or, if there were a sympathy in choice, war, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, making it momentary as a sound, swift as a shadow, short as any dream, brief as the lightning in the collied night; that, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth, and ere a man hath power to say \"behold!\" the jaws of darkness do devour it up. so quick bright things come to confusion.", "if then true lovers have been ever crossed, it stands as an edict in destiny. then let us teach our trial patience, because it is a customary cross, as due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs, wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers.", "a good persuasion. therefore, hear me, hermia. i have a widow aunt, a dowager of great revenue, and she hath no child. from athens is her house remote seven leagues, and she respects me as her only son. there, gentle hermia, may i marry thee. and to that place the sharp athenian law cannot pursue us. if thou lovest me then, steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night. and in the wood, a league without the town"], ["where i did meet thee once with helena to do observance to a morn of may there will i stay for thee.", "my good lysander! i swear to thee by cupid's strongest bow, by his best arrow with the golden head, by the simplicity of venus' doves, by that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, and by that fire which burned the carthage queen when the false troyan under sail was seen, by all the vows that ever men have broke (in number more than ever women spoke), in that same place thou hast appointed me, tomorrow truly will i meet with thee.", "keep promise, love. look, here comes helena.", "godspeed, fair helena! whither away?", "call you me \"fair\"? that \"fair\" again unsay. demetrius loves your fair. o happy fair! your eyes are lodestars, and your tongue's sweet air more tunable than lark to shepherd's ear when wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear. sickness is catching. oh, were favor so, yours would i catch, fair hermia, ere i go. my ear should catch your voice. my eye, your eye. my tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody. were the world mine, demetrius being bated, the rest i'd give to be to you translated."], ["o, teach me how you look and with what art you sway the motion of demetrius' heart.", "i frown upon him, yet he loves me still.", "oh, that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!", "i give him curses, yet he gives me love.", "oh, that my prayers could such affection move!", "the more i hate, the more he follows me.", "the more i love, the more he hateth me.", "his folly, helena, is no fault of mine.", "none, but your beauty. would that fault were mine!", "take comfort. he no more shall see my face. lysander and myself will fly this place. before the time i did lysander see seemed athens as a paradise to me. oh, then, what graces in my love do dwell, that he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!", "helen, to you our minds we will unfold. tomorrow night when phoebe doth behold her silver visage in the watery glass, decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass (a time that lovers' flights doth still conceal), through athens' gates have we devised to steal.", "helena and in the wood where often you and i upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie, emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,"], ["there my lysander and myself shall meet. and thence from athens turn away our eyes to seek new friends and stranger companies. farewell, sweet playfellow. pray thou for us. and good luck grant thee thy demetrius! keep word, lysander. we must starve our sight from lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.", "i will, my hermia.", "helena, adieu. as you on him, demetrius dote on you!", "how happy some o'er other some can be! through athens i am thought as fair as she. but what of that? demetrius thinks not so. he will not know what all but he do know. and as he errs, doting on hermia's eyes, so i, admiring of his qualities. things base and vile, holding no quantity, love can transpose to form and dignity. love looks not with the eyes but with the mind. and therefore is winged cupid painted blind. nor hath love's mind of any judgment taste wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste. and therefore is love said to be a child, because in choice he is so oft beguiled. as waggish boys in game themselves forswear, so the boy love is perjured everywhere. for ere demetrius looked on hermia's eyne, he hailed down oaths that he was only mine."], ["and when this hail some heat from hermia felt, so he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt. i will go tell him of fair hermia's flight. then to the wood will he tomorrow night pursue her. and for this intelligence if i have thanks, it is a dear expense. but herein mean i to enrich my pain, to have his sight thither and back again."], ["is all our company here?", "you were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.", "here is the scroll of every man's name which is thought fit, through all athens, to play in our interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his wedding day at night.", "first, good peter quince, say what the play treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow to a point.", "marry, our play is the most lamentable comedy and most .", "a very good piece of work, i assure you, and a merry. now, good peter quince, call forth your actors by the scroll. masters, spread yourselves.", "answer as i call you. nick bottom, the weaver?", "ready. name what part i am for and proceed.", "you, nick bottom, are set down for pyramus."], ["what is pyramus? a lover or a", "a lover that kills himself, most gallant, for love.", "that will ask some tears in the true performing of it. if i do it, let the audience look to their eyes. i will move storms. i will condole in some measure. to the rest. yet my chief humor is for a tyrant. i could play ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in to make all split. . . this was lofty! now name the rest of the players. this is ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein. a lover is more condoling.", "francis flute, the bellows-mender?", "here, peter quince.", "flute, you must take thisbe on you."], ["what is thisbe? a wandering knight?", "it is the lady that pyramus must love.", "nay, faith, let me not play a woman. i have a beard coming.", "that's all one. you shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small as you will.", "an i may hide my face, let me play thisbe too! i'll speak in a monstrous little voice: \"thisne, thisne!\" \"ah, pyramus, my lover dear, thy thisbe dear and lady dear!\"", "no, no. you must play pyramus. and flute, you thisbe.", "well, proceed.", "robin starveling, the tailor?", "here, peter quince.", "robin starveling, you must play thisbe's mother. tom snout, the tinker?", "here, peter quince.", "you, pyramus' father. myself, thisbe's father. snug the joiner, you, the lion's part. and i hope here is a play fitted."], ["have you the lion's part written? pray you, if it be, give it me, for i am slow of study.", "you may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.", "let me play the lion too. i will roar, that i will do any man's heart good to hear me. i will roar, that i will make the duke say, \"let him roar again. let him roar again.\"", "an you should do it too terribly, you would fright the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek. and that were enough to hang us all.", "that would hang us, every mother's son.", "i grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us. but i will aggravate my voice so that i will roar you as gently as any sucking dove. i will roar you an 'twere any nightingale.", "you can play no part but pyramus. for pyramus is a sweet-faced man, a proper man as one shall see in a summer's day, a most lovely, gentlemanlike man. therefore you must needs play pyramus.", "well, i will undertake it. what beard were i best to play it in?", "why, what you will."], ["i will discharge it in either your straw-color beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your french crown-color beard, your perfect yellow.", "some of your french crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play barefaced. but masters, here are your parts. and i am to entreat you, request you, and desire you to con them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight. there will we rehearse, for if we meet in the city we shall be dogged with company, and our devices known. in the meantime i will draw a bill of properties such as our play wants. i pray you, fail me not.", "we will meet, and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously. take pains. be perfect. adieu.", "at the duke's oak we meet.", "enough. hold, or cut bowstrings."], ["how now, spirit? whither wander you?", "over hill, over dale, thorough bush, thorough brier, over park, over pale, thorough flood, thorough fire. i do wander everywhere swifter than the moon's sphere. and i serve the fairy queen to dew her orbs upon the green. the cowslips tall her pensioners be. in their gold coats spots you see. those be rubies, fairy favors. in those freckles live their savors. i must go seek some dewdrops here and hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear. farewell, thou lob of spirits. i'll be gone. our queen and all our elves come here anon.", "the king doth keep his revels here tonight. take heed the queen come not within his sight. for oberon is passing fell and wrath because that she, as her attendant hath a lovely boy stolen from an indian king. she never had so sweet a changeling. and jealous oberon would have the child knight of his train, to trace the forests wild. but she perforce withholds the lovd boy, crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy."], ["and now they never meet in grove or green, by fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen. but they do square, that all their elves for fear creep into acorn cups and hide them there.", "either i mistake your shape and making quite, or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite called robin goodfellow. are not you he that frights the maidens of the villagery, skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern and bootless make the breathless housewife churn, and sometime make the drink to bear no barm, mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm? those that \"hobgoblin\" call you, and \"sweet puck,\" you do their work, and they shall have good luck. are not you he?", "thou speak'st aright. i am that merry wanderer of the night. i jest to oberon and make him smile when i a fat and bean-fed horse beguile, neighing in likeness of a filly foal. and sometime lurk i in a gossip's bowl in very likeness of a roasted crab, and when she drinks, against her lips i bob and on her withered dewlap pour the ale. the wisest aunt telling the saddest tale sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me. then slip i from her bum, down topples she, and \"tailor!\" cries, and falls into a cough, and then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh, and waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear a merrier hour was never wasted there. but, room, fairy! here comes oberon.", "and here my mistress. would that he were gone!"], ["ill met by moonlight, proud titania.", "what, jealous oberon? fairies, skip hence. i have forsworn his bed and company.", "tarry, rash wanton. am not i thy lord?", "then i must be thy lady. but i know when thou hast stolen away from fairyland, and in the shape of corin sat all day, playing on pipes of corn and versing love to amorous phillida. why art thou here, come from the farthest step of india? but that, forsooth, the bouncing amazon, your buskined mistress and your warrior love, to theseus must be wedded, and you come to give their bed joy and prosperity.", "how canst thou thus for shame, titania, knowing i know thy love to theseus? glance at my credit with hippolyta, didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night from perigouna, whom he ravishd? and make him with fair gles break his faith, with ariadne and antiopa?"], ["these are the forgeries of jealousy. and never, since the middle summer's spring, met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead, by pavd fountain, or by rushy brook, or in the beachd margent of the sea, to dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, but with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport. therefore the winds, piping to us in vain, as in revenge, have sucked up from the sea contagious fogs, which falling in the land have every pelting river made so proud that they have overborne their continents. the ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain, the ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard. the fold stands empty in the drownd field, and crows are fatted with the murrain flock. the nine-men's-morris is filled up with mud, and the quaint mazes in the wanton green for lack of tread are undistinguishable. the human mortals want their winter here. no night is now with hymn or carol blessed. therefore the moon, the governess of floods, pale in her anger, washes all the air, that rheumatic diseases do abound. and thorough this distemperature we see the seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose, and on old hiems' thin and icy crown an odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds is, as in mockery, set. the spring, the summer, the childing autumn, angry winter change their wonted liveries, and the mazd world, by their increase, now knows not which is which. and this same progeny of evils comes from our debate, from our dissension. we are their parents and original."], ["do you amend it then. it lies in you. why should titania cross her oberon? i do but beg a little changeling boy, to be my henchman.", "set your heart at rest. the fairyland buys not the child of me. his mother was a votaress of my order, and in the spicd indian air by night full often hath she gossiped by my side, and sat with me on neptune's yellow sands, marking th' embarkd traders on the flood, when we have laughed to see the sails conceive and grow big-bellied with the wanton wind; which she, with pretty and with swimming gait following her womb then rich with my young squire would imitate, and sail upon the land to fetch me trifles and return again as from a voyage, rich with merchandise. but she, being mortal, of that boy did die. and for her sake do i rear up her boy, and for her sake i will not part with him.", "how long within this wood intend you stay?", "perchance till after theseus' wedding day. if you will patiently dance in our round and see our moonlight revels, go with us. if not, shun me, and i will spare your haunts.", "give me that boy and i will go with thee.", "not for thy fairy kingdom. fairies, away! we shall chide downright, if i longer stay."], ["well, go thy way. thou shalt not from this grove till i torment thee for this injury. robin goodfellow my gentle puck, come hither. thou rememberest since once i sat upon a promontory and heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath that the rude sea grew civil at her song and certain stars shot madly from their spheres to hear the seamaid's music?", "i remember.", "that very time i saw (but thou couldst not) flying between the cold moon and the earth, cupid all armed. a certain aim he took at a fair vestal thrond by the west, and loosed his love shaft smartly from his bow as it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts. but i might see young cupid's fiery shaft quenched in the chaste beams of the watery moon, and the imperial votaress passd on, in maiden meditation, fancy-free. yet marked i where the bolt of cupid fell. it fell upon a little western flower, before milk-white, now purple with love's wound. and maidens call it \"love-in-idleness.\" fetch me that flower. the herb i showed thee once. the juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid will make or man or woman madly dote upon the next live creature that it sees. fetch me this herb, and be thou here again ere the leviathan can swim a league.", "i'll put a girdle round about the earth in forty minutes."], ["having once this juice, i'll watch titania when she is asleep and drop the liquor of it in her eyes. the next thing then she waking looks upon be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull, on meddling monkey or on busy ape she shall pursue it with the soul of love. and ere i take this charm from of her sight as i can take it with another herb i'll make her render up her page to me. but who comes here? i am invisible. and i will overhear their conference.", "i love thee not, therefore pursue me not. where is lysander and fair hermia? the one i'll stay, the other stayeth me. thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood. and here am i, and wood within this wood, because i cannot meet my hermia. hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.", "you draw me, you hard-hearted adamant. but yet you draw not iron, for my heart is true as steel. leave you your power to draw, and i shall have no power to follow you.", "do i entice you? do i speak you fair? or rather, do i not in plainest truth tell you i do not, nor i cannot, love you?"], ["and even for that do i love you the more. i am your spaniel. and, demetrius, the more you beat me, i will fawn on you. use me but as your spaniel spurn me, strike me, neglect me, lose me. only give me leave, unworthy as i am, to follow you. what worser place can i beg in your love and yet a place of high respect with me than to be usd as you use your dog?", "tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit. for i am sick when i do look on thee.", "and i am sick when i look not on you.", "you do impeach your modesty too much, to leave the city and commit yourself into the hands of one that loves you not, to trust the opportunity of night and the ill counsel of a desert place with the rich worth of your virginity.", "your virtue is my privilege. for that it is not night when i do see your face. therefore i think i am not in the night. nor doth this wood lack worlds of company, for you in my respect are all the world. then how can it be said i am alone when all the world is here to look on me?", "i'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes, and leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.", "the wildest hath not such a heart as you. run when you will, the story shall be changed."], ["apollo flies and daphne holds the chase. the dove pursues the griffin. the mild hind makes speed to catch the tiger bootless speed, when cowardice pursues and valor flies.", "i will not stay thy questions. let me go. or if thou follow me, do not believe but i shall do thee mischief in the wood.", "ay, in the temple, in the town, the field you do me mischief. fie, demetrius! your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex. we cannot fight for love as men may do. we should be wooed and were not made to woo.", "i'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell, to die upon the hand i love so well.", "fare thee well, nymph. ere he do leave this grove, thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love.", "hast thou the flower there? welcome, wanderer.", "ay, there it is.", "i pray thee, give it me. robin i know a bank where the wild thyme blows, where oxlips and the nodding violet grows, quite overcanopied with luscious woodbine, with sweet musk roses and with eglantine."], ["there sleeps titania sometime of the night, lulled in these flowers with dances and delight. and there the snake throws her enameled skin, weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in. and with the juice of this i'll streak her eyes and make her full of hateful fantasies. robin take thou some of it and seek through this grove: a sweet athenian lady is in love with a disdainful youth. anoint his eyes. but do it when the next thing he espies may be the lady. thou shalt know the man by the athenian garments he hath on. effect it with some care, that he may prove more fond on her than she upon her love. and look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.", "fear not, my lord. your servant shall do so."], ["come now, a roundel and a fairy song. then for the third part of a minute, hence some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds, some war with reremice for their leathern wings to make my small elves coats, and some keep back the clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders at our quaint spirits. sing me now asleep. then to your offices and let me rest.", ", . .", ". . .", "."], [".", ". . .", "hence, away! now all is well. one aloof stand sentinel.", "titania what thou seest when thou dost wake, do it for thy true love take. love and languish for his sake. be it ounce or cat or bear, pard or boar with bristled hair, in thy eye that shall appear, when thou wakest, it is thy dear. wake when some vile thing is near.", "fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood. and to speak troth, i have forgot our way."], ["we'll rest us, hermia, if you think it good. and tarry for the comfort of the day.", "be it so, lysander. find you out a bed, for i upon this bank will rest my head.", "one turf shall serve as pillow for us both. one heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.", "nay, good lysander. for my sake, my dear, lie further off yet. do not lie so near.", "o, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence. love takes the meaning in love's conference. i mean that my heart unto yours is knit so that but one heart we can make of it. two bosoms interchaind with an oath so then two bosoms and a single troth. then by your side no bed room me deny. for, lying so, hermia, i do not lie.", "lysander riddles very prettily. now much beshrew my manners and my pride if hermia meant to say lysander lied. but, gentle friend, for love and courtesy lie further off in human modesty. such separation as may well be said becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid. so far be distant. and, good night, sweet friend. thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!", "amen, amen to that fair prayer, say i. and then end life when i end loyalty! here is my bed. sleep give thee all his rest!"], ["with half that wish the wisher's eyes be pressed!", "through the forest have i gone. but athenian found i none, on whose eyes i might approve this flower's force in stirring love. lysander hermia night and silence! who is here? weeds of athens he doth wear. this is he, my master said, despisd the athenian maid. and here the maiden, sleeping sound on the dank and dirty ground. pretty soul! she durst not lie near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy. lysander churl, upon thy eyes i throw all the power this charm doth owe. when thou wakest, let love forbid sleep his seat on thy eyelid. so awake when i am gone, for i must now to oberon.", "stay, though thou kill me, sweet demetrius.", "i charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.", "o, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so."], ["stay, on thy peril. i alone will go.", "oh, i am out of breath in this fond chase. the more my prayer, the lesser is my grace. happy is hermia, wheresoe'er she lies, for she hath blessd and attractive eyes. how came her eyes so bright? not with salt tears. if so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers. no, no, i am as ugly as a bear, for beasts that meet me run away for fear. therefore no marvel though demetrius do, as a monster, fly my presence thus. what wicked and dissembling glass of mine made me compare with hermia's sphery eyne? lysander but who is here? lysander, on the ground? dead or asleep? i see no blood, no wound. lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.", "and run through fire i will for thy sweet sake. transparent helena! nature shows art that through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. where is demetrius? oh, how fit a word is that vile name to perish on my sword!", "do not say so, lysander. say not so. what though he love your hermia? lord, what though? yet hermia still loves you. then be content.", "content with hermia? no. i do repent the tedious minutes i with her have spent. not hermia but helena i love. who will not change a raven for a dove? the will of man is by his reason swayed, and reason says you are the worthier maid."], ["things growing are not ripe until their season. so i, being young, till now ripe not to reason. and touching now the point of human skill, reason becomes the marshal to my will and leads me to your eyes, where i o'erlook love's stories written in love's richest book.", "wherefore was i to this keen mockery born? when at your hands did i deserve this scorn? is 't not enough, is 't not enough, young man, that i did never, no, nor never can, deserve a sweet look from demetrius' eye, but you must flout my insufficiency? good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do, in such disdainful manner me to woo. but fare you well. perforce i must confess i thought you lord of more true gentleness. oh, that a lady of one man refused should of another therefore be abused!", "she sees not hermia. hermia, sleep thou there. and never mayst thou come lysander near! for as a surfeit of the sweetest things the deepest loathing to the stomach brings, or as the heresies that men do leave are hated most of those they did deceive, so thou, my surfeit and my heresy, of all be hated, but the most of me. and all my powers, address your love and might to honor helen and to be her knight."], ["help me, lysander, help me! do thy best to pluck this crawling serpent from my breast. ay me, for pity! what a dream was here. lysander, look how i do quake with fear. methought a serpent eat my heart away, and you sat smiling at his cruel pray. lysander! what, removed? lysander, lord! what, out of hearing, gone? no sound, no word? alack, where are you? speak, an if you hear. speak, of all loves! i swoon almost with fear. no? then i well perceive you all not nigh. either death or you i'll find immediately."], ["are we all met?", "pat, pat. and here's a marvelous convenient place for our rehearsal. this green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house, and we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.", "peter quince", "what sayest thou, bully bottom?", "there are things in this comedy of pyramus and thisbe that will never please. first, pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies cannot abide. how answer you that?", "by 'r lakin, a parlous fear.", "i believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.", "not a whit. i have a device to make all well. write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords, and that pyramus is not killed indeed. and for the more better assurance, tell them that i, pyramus, am not pyramus, but bottom the weaver. this will put them out of fear."], ["well. we will have such a prologue, and it shall be written in eight and six.", "no, make it two more. let it be written in eight and eight.", "will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?", "i fear it, i promise you.", "masters, you ought to consider with yourselves. to bring in god shield us! a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing. for there is not a more fearful wildfowl than your lion living. and we ought to look to 't.", "therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.", "nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the lion's neck. and he himself must speak through, saying thus or to the same defect \"ladies,\" or \"fair ladies,\" \"i would wish you\" or \"i would request you\" or \"i would entreat you\" \"not to fear, not to tremble, my life for yours. if you think i come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life. no, i am no such thing. i am a man as other men are.\" and there indeed let him name his name, and tell them plainly he is snug the joiner.", "well, it shall be so. but there is two hard things: that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber. for, you know, pyramus and thisbe meet by moonlight."], ["doth the moon shine that night we play our play?", "a calendar, a calendar! look in the almanac. find out moonshine, find out moonshine!", "yes, it doth shine that night.", "why then, may you leave a casement of the great chamber window where we play open, and the moon may shine in at the casement.", "ay. or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern, and say he comes to disfigure, or to present, the person of moonshine. then, there is another thing: we must have a wall in the great chamber. for pyramus and thisbe, says the story, did talk through the chink of a wall.", "you can never bring in a wall. what say you, bottom?", "some man or other must present wall. and let him have some plaster, or some loam, or some roughcast about him to signify wall. and let him hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall pyramus and thisbe whisper.", "if that may be then all is well. come, sit down, every mother's son, and rehearse your parts. pyramus, you begin. when you have spoken your speech, enter into that brake. and so everyone according to his cue."], ["what hempen homespuns have we swaggering here, so near the cradle of the fairy queen? what, a play toward? i'll be an auditor. an actor too, perhaps, if i see cause.", "speak, pyramus. thisbe, stand forth.", "pyramus thisbe, the flowers of odious savors sweet", "\"odors,\" \"odors.\"", "pyramus odors savors sweet, so hath thy breath, my dearest thisbe dear. and by and by i will to thee appear. but hark, a voice! stay thou but here awhile,", "a stranger pyramus than e'er played here.", "must i speak now?", "ay, marry, must you. for you must understand he goes but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.", "thisbe most radiant pyramus, most lily-white of hue, of color like the red rose on triumphant brier, most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely jew, as true as truest horse that yet would never tire. i'll meet thee, pyramus, at ninny's tomb."], ["\"ninus' tomb,\" man. why, you must not speak that yet. that you answer to pyramus. you speak all your part at once, cues and all. pyramus, enter. your cue is past. it is \"never tire.\"", "oh. (as thisbe) as true as truest horse that yet would never tire.", "pyramus if i were fair, thisbe, i were only thine.", "oh, monstrous! oh, strange! we are haunted. pray, masters! fly, masters! help!", "i'll follow you. i'll lead you about a round through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier. sometime a horse i'll be, sometime a hound, a hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire. and neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn, like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.", "why do they run away? this is a knavery of them to make me afeard."], ["o bottom, thou art changed! what do i see on thee?", "what do you see? you see an ass head of your own, do you?", "bless thee, bottom, bless thee. thou art translated.", "i see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me, to fright me if they could. but i will not stir from this place, do what they can. i will walk up and down here and i will sing, that they shall hear i am not afraid. , ,", "what angel wakes me from my flowery bed?", ", ,"], ["for indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird? who would give a bird the lie, though he cry \"cuckoo\" never so?", "i pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again. mine ear is much enamored of thy note. so is mine eye enthralld to thy shape. and thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me on the first view to say, to swear, i love thee.", "methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that. and yet, to say the truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays. the more the pity that some honest neighbors will not make them friends. nay, i can gleek upon occasion.", "thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.", "not so, neither. but if i had wit enough to get out of this wood, i have enough to serve mine own turn.", "out of this wood do not desire to go. thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no. i am a spirit of no common rate. the summer still doth tend upon my state. and i do love thee. therefore go with me. i'll give thee fairies to attend on thee. and they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep, and sing while thou on pressd flowers dost sleep. and i will purge thy mortal grossness so that thou shalt like an airy spirit go. peaseblossom, cobweb, moth, and mustardseed!"], ["ready.", "and i.", "and i.", "and i.", "where shall we go?", "be kind and courteous to this gentleman. hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes. feed him with apricoks and dewberries, with purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries. the honey bags steal from the humble-bees, and for night tapers crop their waxen thighs and light them at the fiery glowworms' eyes to have my love to bed and to arise. and pluck the wings from painted butterflies to fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes. nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.", "hail, mortal.", "hail.", "hail.", "hail.", "i cry your worships' mercy, heartily. i beseech your worship's name."], ["cobweb.", "i shall desire you of more acquaintance, good master cobweb. if i cut my finger, i shall make bold with you. your name, honest gentleman?", "peaseblossom.", "i pray you, commend me to mistress squash, your mother, and to master peascod, your father. good master peaseblossom, i shall desire you of more acquaintance too. your name, i beseech you, sir?", "mustardseed.", "good master mustardseed, i know your patience well. that same cowardly, giantlike ox-beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. i promise you your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. i desire you of more acquaintance, good master mustardseed.", "come, wait upon him. lead him to my bower. the moon methinks looks with a watery eye. and when she weeps, weeps every little flower, lamenting some enforcd chastity. tie up my love's tongue. bring him silently."], ["i wonder if titania be awaked. then, what it was that next came in her eye, which she must dote on in extremity.", "here comes my messenger. how now, mad spirit? what night-rule now about this haunted grove?", "my mistress with a monster is in love. near to her close and consecrated bower, while she was in her dull and sleeping hour, a crew of patches, rude mechanicals that work for bread upon athenian stalls, were met together to rehearse a play intended for great theseus' nuptial day. the shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort, who pyramus presented in their sport, forsook his scene and entered in a brake, when i did him at this advantage take, an ass's nole i fixd on his head. anon his thisbe must be answerd, and forth my mimic comes. when they him spy, as wild geese that the creeping fowler eye, or russet-pated choughs, many in sort, rising and cawing at the gun's report, sever themselves and madly sweep the sky so at his sight away his fellows fly; and, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls."], ["he \"murder!\" cries and help from athens calls. their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong, made senseless things begin to do them wrong. for briers and thorns at their apparel snatch, some sleeves, some hats from yielders all things catch. i led them on in this distracted fear and left sweet pyramus translated there. when in that moment so it came to pass, titania waked and straightway loved an ass.", "this falls out better than i could devise. but hast thou yet latched the athenian's eyes with the love juice, as i did bid thee do?", "i took him sleeping that is finished too and the athenian woman by his side, that, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.", "robin stand close. this is the same athenian.", "oberon this is the woman, but not this the man.", "oh, why rebuke you him that loves you so? lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.", "now i but chide, but i should use thee worse. for thou, i fear, hast given me cause to curse. if thou hast slain lysander in his sleep, being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep, and kill me too."], ["the sun was not so true unto the day as he to me. would he have stolen away from sleeping hermia? i'll believe as soon this whole earth may be bored, and that the moon may through the center creep and so displease her brother's noontide with th' antipodes. it cannot be but thou hast murdered him. so should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.", "so should the murdered look, and so should i, pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty. yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear, as yonder venus in her glimmering sphere.", "what's this to my lysander? where is he? ah, good demetrius, wilt thou give him me?", "i had rather give his carcass to my hounds.", "out, dog! out, cur! thou drivest me past the bounds of maiden's patience. hast thou slain him then? henceforth be never numbered among men! oh, once tell true, tell true even for my sake durst thou have looked upon him being awake, and hast thou killed him sleeping? o brave touch! could not a worm, an adder, do so much? an adder did it, for with doubler tongue than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.", "you spend your passion on a misprised mood. i am not guilty of lysander's blood. nor is he dead, for aught that i can tell.", "i pray thee, tell me then that he is well.", "an if i could, what should i get therefore?"], ["a privilege never to see me more. and from thy hated presence part i so. see me no more, whether he be dead or no.", "there is no following her in this fierce vein. here therefore for a while i will remain. so sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow for debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe, which now in some slight measure it will pay, if for his tender here i make some stay.", "robin what hast thou done? thou hast mistaken quite, and laid the love juice on some true love's sight. of thy misprision must perforce ensue some true love turned, and not a false turned true.", "then fate o'errules that, one man holding troth, a million fail, confounding oath on oath.", "about the wood go swifter than the wind, and helena of athens look thou find all fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer, with sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear. by some illusion see thou bring her here. i'll charm his eyes against she do appear.", "i go, i go. look how i go, swifter than arrow from the tartar's bow."], ["demetrius flower of this purple dye, hit with cupid's archery, sink in apple of his eye. when his love he doth espy, let her shine as gloriously as the venus of the sky. when thou wakest, if she be by, beg of her for remedy.", "captain of our fairy band, helena is here at hand, and the youth, mistook by me, pleading for a lover's fee. shall we their fond pageant see? lord, what fools these mortals be!", "stand aside. the noise they make will cause demetrius to awake.", "then will two at once woo one. that must needs be sport alone. and those things do best please me that befall preposterously.", "why should you think that i should woo in scorn? scorn and derision never come in tears."], ["look, when i vow, i weep. and vows so born, in their nativity all truth appears. how can these things in me seem scorn to you, bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?", "you do advance your cunning more and more. when truth kills truth, o devilish holy fray! these vows are hermia's. will you give her o'er? weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh. your vows to her and me, put in two scales, will even weigh, and both as light as tales.", "i had no judgment when to her i swore.", "nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.", "demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.", "o helena, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine! to what, my love, shall i compare thine eyne? crystal is muddy. oh, how ripe in show thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow! that pure congeald white, high taurus' snow, fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow when thou hold'st up thy hand. oh, let me kiss this princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!", "o spite! o hell! i see you all are bent to set against me for your merriment. if you were civil and knew courtesy, you would not do me thus much injury. can you not hate me, as i know you do, but you must join in souls to mock me too? if you were men, as men you are in show, you would not use a gentle lady so"], ["to vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts, when i am sure you hate me with your hearts. you both are rivals, and love hermia, and now both rivals to mock helena a trim exploit, a manly enterprise, to conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes with your derision! none of noble sort would so offend a virgin, and extort a poor soul's patience, all to make you sport.", "you are unkind, demetrius. be not so. for you love hermia. this you know i know. and here, with all good will, with all my heart, in hermia's love i yield you up my part. and yours of helena to me bequeath, whom i do love and will do till my death.", "never did mockers waste more idle breath.", "lysander, keep thy hermia. i will none. if e'er i loved her, all that love is gone. my heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned, and now to helen is it home returned, there to remain.", "helen, it is not so.", "disparage not the faith thou dost not know, lest to thy peril thou aby it dear. look, where thy love comes. yonder is thy dear.", "dark night, that from the eye his function takes, the ear more quick of apprehension makes. wherein it doth impair the seeing sense, it pays the hearing double recompense."], ["thou art not by mine eye, lysander, found. mine ear, i thank it, brought me to thy sound but why unkindly didst thou leave me so?", "why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?", "what love could press lysander from my side?", "lysander's love, that would not let him bide, fair helena, who more engilds the night than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light. why seek'st thou me? could not this make thee know the hate i bear thee made me leave thee so?", "you speak not as you think. it cannot be.", "lo, she is one of this confederacy! now i perceive they have conjoined all three to fashion this false sport, in spite of me. injurious hermia! most ungrateful maid! have you conspired, have you with these contrived to bait me with this foul derision? is all the counsel that we two have shared, the sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent when we have chid the hasty-footed time for parting us oh, is it all forgot? all schooldays' friendship, childhood innocence? we, hermia, like two artificial gods, have with our needles created both one flower, both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion, both warbling of one song, both in one key, as if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds, had been incorporate. so we grew together, like to a double cherry seeming parted but yet an union in partition two lovely berries molded on one stem;"], ["so, with two seeming bodies but one heart, two of the first, like coats in heraldry, due but to one and crownd with one crest. and will you rent our ancient love asunder to join with men in scorning your poor friend? it is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly. our sex, as well as i, may chide you for it, though i alone do feel the injury.", "i am amazd at your passionate words. i scorn you not. it seems that you scorn me.", "have you not set lysander, as in scorn, to follow me and praise my eyes and face? and made your other love, demetrius who even but now did spurn me with his foot to call me goddess, nymph, divine, and rare, precious, celestial? wherefore speaks he this to her he hates? and wherefore doth lysander deny your love, so rich within his soul, and tender me, forsooth, affection, but by your setting on, by your consent? what though i be not so in grace as you so hung upon with love, so fortunate but miserable most, to love unloved? this you should pity rather than despise.", "i understand not what you mean by this.", "ay, do. persever, counterfeit sad looks, make mouths upon me when i turn my back, wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up this sport, well carried, shall be chronicled."], ["if you have any pity, grace, or manners, you would not make me such an argument. but fare ye well. 'tis partly my own fault, which death or absence soon shall remedy.", "stay, gentle helena. hear my excuse. my love, my life, my soul, fair helena!", "oh, excellent!", "lysander sweet, do not scorn her so.", "if she cannot entreat, i can compel.", "thou canst compel no more than she entreat. thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers. helen, i love thee. by my life, i do. i swear by that which i will lose for thee to prove him false that says i love thee not.", "i say i love thee more than he can do.", "if thou say so, withdraw and prove it too.", "quick, come.", "lysander, whereto tends all this?", "hermia away, you ethiope!", "hermia no, no. he'll seem to break loose."], ["lysander take on as you would follow, but yet come not. you are a tame man, go!", "hermia hang off, thou cat, thou burr! vile thing, let loose or i will shake thee from me like a serpent.", "why are you grown so rude? what change is this, sweet love?", "thy love? out, tawny tartar, out! out, loathd medicine! o hated potion, hence!", "do you not jest?", "yes, sooth, and so do you.", "demetrius, i will keep my word with thee.", "i would i had your bond, for i perceive a weak bond holds you. i'll not trust your word.", "what, should i hurt her, strike her, kill her dead? although i hate her, i'll not harm her so.", "lysander what, can you do me greater harm than hate? hate me? wherefore? o me! what news, my love? am not i hermia? are not you lysander? i am as fair now as i was erewhile. since night you loved me. yet since night you left me. why then, you left me oh, the gods forbid! in earnest, shall i say?", "ay, by my life, and never did desire to see thee more. therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt."], ["be certain, nothing truer. 'tis no jest that i do hate thee and love helena.", "o me! helena you juggler! you canker-blossom! you thief of love! what, have you come by night and stol'n my love's heart from him?", "fine, i' faith! have you no modesty, no maiden shame, no touch of bashfulness? what, will you tear impatient answers from my gentle tongue? fie, fie! you counterfeit, you puppet, you!", "\"puppet\"? why so? ay, that way goes the game. now i perceive that she hath made compare between our statures. she hath urged her height, and with her personage, her tall personage, her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him. and are you grown so high in his esteem because i am so dwarfish and so low? how low am i, thou painted maypole? speak. how low am i? i am not yet so low but that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.", "lysander demetrius i pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen, let her not hurt me. i was never cursed. i have no gift at all in shrewishness. i am a right maid for my cowardice. let her not strike me. you perhaps may think, because she is something lower than myself, that i can match her."], ["\"lower\"? hark, again!", "good hermia, do not be so bitter with me. i evermore did love you, hermia, did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you save that, in love unto demetrius, i told him of your stealth unto this wood. he followed you. for love i followed him. but he hath chid me hence and threatened me to strike me, spurn me nay, to kill me too. and now, so you will let me quiet go, to athens will i bear my folly back and follow you no further. let me go. you see how simple and how fond i am.", "why, get you gone! who is 't that hinders you?", "a foolish heart, that i leave here behind.", "what, with lysander?", "with demetrius.", "be not afraid. she shall not harm thee, helena.", "lysander no, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.", "oh, when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd! she was a vixen when she went to school. and though she be but little, she is fierce.", "\"little\" again? nothing but \"low\" and \"little\"! why will you suffer her to flout me thus? let me come to her."], ["hermia get you gone, you dwarf, you minimus of hindering knotgrass made, you bead, you acorn!", "you are too officious in her behalf that scorns your services. let her alone. speak not of helena. take not her part. for if thou dost intend never so little show of love to her, thou shalt aby it.", "now she holds me not. now follow, if thou darest, to try whose right, of thine or mine, is most in helena.", "\"follow\"? nay, i'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.", "you, mistress, all this coil is long of you. nay, go not back.", "i will not trust you, i, nor longer stay in your curst company. your hands than mine are quicker for a fray. my legs are longer though, to run away.", "i am amazed and know not what to say.", "robin this is thy negligence. still thou mistakest, or else committ'st thy knaveries willfully."], ["believe me, king of shadows, i mistook. did not you tell me i should know the man by the athenian garment he had on? and so far blameless proves my enterprise, that i have 'nointed an athenian's eyes. and so far am i glad it so did sort, as this their jangling i esteem a sport.", "thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight. hie therefore, robin, overcast the night. the starry welkin cover thou anon with drooping fog as black as acheron, and lead these testy rivals so astray as one come not within another's way. like to lysander sometime frame thy tongue, then stir demetrius up with bitter wrong. and sometime rail thou like demetrius. and from each other look thou lead them thus, till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep with leaden legs and batty wings doth creep. robin then crush this herb into lysander's eye, whose liquor hath this virtuous property to take from thence all error with his might and make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight. when they next wake, all this derision shall seem a dream and fruitless vision. and back to athens shall the lovers wend, with league whose date till death shall never end. whiles i in this affair do thee employ, i'll to my queen and beg her indian boy. and then i will her charmd eye release from monster's view, and all things shall be peace."], ["my fairy lord, this must be done with haste. for night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast, and yonder shines aurora's harbinger, at whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there, troop home to churchyards. damnd spirits all, that in crossways and floods have burial, already to their wormy beds are gone. for fear lest day should look their shames upon, they willfully themselves exile from light and must for aye consort with black-browed night.", "but we are spirits of another sort. i with the morning's love have oft made sport, and like a forester the groves may tread even till the eastern gate, all fiery red, opening on neptune with fair blessd beams, turns into yellow gold his salt green streams. but notwithstanding, haste. make no delay. we may effect this business yet ere day.", "up and down, up and down, i will lead them up and down. i am feared in field and town. goblin, lead them up and down. here comes one.", "where art thou, proud demetrius? speak thou now."], ["demetrius here, villain. drawn and ready. where art thou?", "i will be with thee straight.", "demetrius follow me then to plainer ground.", "lysander, speak again! thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled? speak! in some bush? where dost thou hide thy head?", "lysander thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars, telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars, and wilt not come? come, recreant. come, thou child! i'll whip thee with a rod. he is defiled that draws a sword on thee.", "yea, art thou there?", "lysander follow my voice. we'll try no manhood here.", "he goes before me and still dares me on. when i come where he calls, then he is gone. the villain is much lighter-heeled than i. i followed fast, but faster he did fly, that fallen am i in dark uneven way,"], ["and here will rest me. come, thou gentle day! for if but once thou show me thy grey light, i'll find demetrius and revenge this spite.", "lysander demetrius ho, ho, ho! coward, why comest thou not?", "abide me, if thou darest! for well i wot thou runn'st before me, shifting every place, and darest not stand nor look me in the face. where art thou now?", "lysander come hither. i am here.", "nay, then, thou mock'st me. thou shalt buy this dear if ever i thy face by daylight see. now go thy way. faintness constraineth me to measure out my length on this cold bed. by day's approach look to be visited.", "o weary night, o long and tedious night, abate thy hours. shine comforts from the east, that i may back to athens by daylight from these that my poor company detest. and sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye, steal me awhile from mine own company."], ["yet but three? come one more. two of both kinds make up four. here she comes, cursed and sad. cupid is a knavish lad thus to make poor females mad.", "never so weary, never so in woe, bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers, i can no further crawl, no further go. my legs can keep no pace with my desires. here will i rest me till the break of day. heavens shield lysander if they mean a fray!", "on the ground sleep sound. i'll apply to your eye. gentle lover, remedy. lysander when thou wakest, thou takest true delight in the sight of thy former lady's eye. and the country proverb known that every man should take his own in your waking shall be shown. jack shall have jill. nought shall go ill. the man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well."], ["bottom come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed while i thy amiable cheeks do coy, and stick musk roses in thy sleek, smooth head, and kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.", "where's peaseblossom?", "ready.", "scratch my head, peaseblossom. where's monsieur cobweb?", "ready.", "monsieur cobweb, good monsieur, get you your weapons in your hand and kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle. and, good monsieur, bring me the honey bag. do not fret yourself too much in the action, monsieur. and good monsieur, have a care the honey bag break not. i would be loath to have you overflown with a honey bag, signor.", "where's monsieur mustardseed?", "ready."], ["give me your neaf, monsieur mustardseed. pray you, leave your courtesy, good monsieur.", "what's your will?", "nothing, good monsieur, but to help cavalery cobweb to scratch. i must to the barber's, monsieur, for methinks i am marvelous hairy about the face. and i am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, i must scratch.", "what, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?", "i have a reasonable good ear in music. let's have the tongs and the bones.", "or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.", "truly, a peck of provender. i could munch your good dry oats. methinks i have a great desire to a bottle of hay. good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.", "i have a venturous fairy that shall seek the squirrel's hoard and fetch thee new nuts.", "i had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. but, i pray you, let none of your people stir me. i have an exposition of sleep come upon me.", "sleep thou, and i will wind thee in my arms. fairies, be gone, and be all ways away."], ["so doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle gently entwist. the female ivy so enrings the barky fingers of the elm. oh, how i love thee! how i dote on thee!", "welcome, good robin. seest thou this sweet sight? her dotage now i do begin to pity. for, meeting her of late behind the wood, seeking sweet favors from this hateful fool, i did upbraid her and fall out with her. for she his hairy temples then had rounded with a coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers, and that same dew, which sometime on the buds was wont to swell like round and orient pearls, stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes like tears that did their own disgrace bewail. when i had at my pleasure taunted her and she in mild terms begged my patience, i then did ask of her her changeling child, which straight she gave me and her fairy sent to bear him to my bower in fairyland. and now i have the boy, i will undo this hateful imperfection of her eyes. and, gentle puck, take this transformd scalp from off the head of this athenian swain, that, he awaking when the other do, may all to athens back again repair and think no more of this night's accidents but as the fierce vexation of a dream. but first i will release the fairy queen."], ["be as thou wast wont to be. see as thou wast wont to see. dian's bud o'er cupid's flower hath such force and blessd power. now, my titania, wake you, my sweet queen.", "my oberon, what visions have i seen! methought i was enamored of an ass.", "there lies your love.", "how came these things to pass? oh, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!", "silence awhile. robin, take off this head. titania, music call, and strike more dead than common sleep of all these five the sense.", "music, ho! music such as charmeth sleep!", "bottom now when thou wakest, with thine own fool's eyes peep.", "sound, music! come, my queen, take hands with me, and rock the ground whereon these sleepers be. titania now thou and i are new in amity, and will tomorrow midnight solemnly dance in duke theseus' house triumphantly, and bless it to all fair prosperity. there shall the pairs of faithful lovers be wedded, with theseus, all in jollity."], ["fairy king, attend, and mark. i do hear the morning lark.", "then, my queen, in silence sad, trip we after the night's shade. we the globe can compass soon swifter than the wandering moon.", "come, my lord, and in our flight tell me how it came this night that i sleeping here was found with these mortals on the ground.", "go, one of you, find out the forester. for now our observation is performed. and since we have the vaward of the day, my love shall hear the music of my hounds. uncouple in the western valley. let them go. dispatch, i say, and find the forester.", "we will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top, and mark the musical confusion of hounds and echo in conjunction.", "i was with hercules and cadmus once, when in a wood of crete they bayed the bear with hounds of sparta. never did i hear such gallant chiding. for, besides the groves,"], ["the skies, the fountains, every region near seemed all one mutual cry. i never heard so musical a discord, such sweet thunder.", "my hounds are bred out of the spartan kind, so flewed, so sanded, and their heads are hung with ears that sweep away the morning dew, crook-kneed, and dew-lapped like thessalian bulls, slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells, each under each. a cry more tunable was never hollaed to, nor cheered with horn, in crete, in sparta, nor in thessaly. judge when you hear. but, soft! what nymphs are these?", "my lord, this is my daughter here asleep. and this, lysander. this demetrius is. this helena, old nedar's helena. i wonder of their being here together.", "no doubt they rose up early to observe the rite of may, and hearing our intent came here in grace our solemnity. but speak, egeus. is not this the day that hermia should give answer of her choice?", "it is, my lord.", "go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.", "good morrow, friends. saint valentine is past."], ["begin these woodbirds but to couple now?", "pardon, my lord.", "i pray you all, stand up.", "lysander demetrius i know you two are rival enemies. how comes this gentle concord in the world, that hatred is so far from jealousy to sleep by hate and fear no enmity?", "my lord, i shall reply amazdly, half sleep, half waking. but as yet, i swear, i cannot truly say how i came here. but as i think for truly would i speak, and now do i bethink me, so it is i came with hermia hither. our intent was to be gone from athens, where we might, without the peril of the athenian law", "theseus enough, enough, my lord. you have enough! i beg the law, the law, upon his head. they would have stol'n away, they would, demetrius, thereby to have defeated you and me, you of your wife and me of my consent, of my consent that she should be your wife.", "theseus my lord, fair helen told me of their stealth, of this their purpose hither to this wood. and i in fury hither followed them, fair helena in fancy following me."], ["but, my good lord, i wot not by what power but by some power it is my love to hermia, melted as the snow, seems to me now as the remembrance of an idle gaud which in my childhood i did dote upon. and all the faith, the virtue of my heart, the object and the pleasure of mine eye, is only helena. to her, my lord, was i betrothed ere i saw hermia. but like in sickness did i loathe this food. but as in health, come to my natural taste, now i do wish it, love it, long for it, and will for evermore be true to it.", "fair lovers, you are fortunately met. of this discourse we more will hear anon. egeus, i will overbear your will. for in the temple by and by with us these couples shall eternally be knit. and, for the morning now is something worn, our purposed hunting shall be set aside. away with us to athens. three and three, we'll hold a feast in great solemnity. come, hippolyta.", "these things seem small and undistinguishable, like far-off mountains turnd into clouds.", "when everything seems double. methinks i see these things with parted eye,", "so methinks."], ["and i have found demetrius like a jewel, mine own, and not mine own.", "are you sure that we are awake? it seems to me that yet we sleep, we dream. do not you think the duke was here, and bid us follow him?", "yea, and my father.", "and hippolyta.", "and he did bid us follow to the temple.", "why then, we are awake. let's follow him and by the way let us recount our dreams.", "when my cue comes, call me, and i will answer. my next is \"most fair pyramus.\" heigh-ho! peter quince? flute the bellows-mender? snout the tinker? starveling? god's my life, stol'n hence, and left me asleep? i have had a most rare vision. i have had a dream past the wit of man to say what dream it was. man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream. methought i was there is no man can tell what. methought i was, and methought i had but man is but a patched fool if he will offer to say what methought i had. the eye of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report what my dream was. i will get peter quince to write a ballad of this dream."], ["it shall be called \"bottom's dream\" because it hath no bottom. and i will sing it in the latter end of a play before the duke. peradventure, to make it the more gracious, i shall sing it at her death."], ["have you sent to bottom's house? is he come home yet?", "he cannot be heard of. out of doubt he is transported.", "if he come not, then the play is marred. it goes not forward. doth it?", "it is not possible. you have not a man in all athens able to discharge pyramus but he.", "no, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in athens.", "yea, and the best person too. and he is a very paramour for a sweet voice.", "you must say \"paragon.\" a \"paramour\" is, god bless us, a thing of naught.", "masters, the duke is coming from the temple, and there is two or three lords and ladies more married. if our sport had gone forward, we had all been made men.", "o sweet bully bottom! thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life. he could not have 'scaped sixpence a day. an the duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing pyramus, i'll be hanged."], ["he would have deserved it. sixpence a day in pyramus, or nothing.", "where are these lads? where are these hearts?", "bottom! o most courageous day! o most happy hour!", "masters, i am to discourse wonders but ask me not what, for if i tell you i am no true athenian. i will tell you everything, right as it fell out.", "let us hear, sweet bottom.", "not a word of me. all that i will tell you is that the duke hath dined. get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your pumps. meet presently at the palace. every man look o'er his part. for the short and the long is, our play is preferred. in any case, let thisbe have clean linen. and let not him that plays the lion pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the lion's claws. and most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath. and i do not doubt but to hear them say, \"it is a sweet comedy.\" no more words. away, go away!"], ["'tis strange, my theseus, that these lovers speak of.", "more strange than true. i never may believe these antique fables nor these fairy toys. lovers and madmen have such seething brains, such shaping fantasies, that apprehend more than cool reason ever comprehends. the lunatic, the lover, and the poet are of imagination all compact. one sees more devils than vast hell can hold that is the madman. the lover, all as frantic, sees helen's beauty in a brow of egypt. the poet's eye, in fine frenzy rolling, doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven. and as imagination bodies forth the forms of things unknown, the poet's pen turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing a local habitation and a name. such tricks hath strong imagination, that if it would but apprehend some joy, it comprehends some bringer of that joy. or in the night, imagining some fear, how easy is a bush supposed a bear!", "but all the story of the night told over, and all their minds transfigured so together, more witnesseth than fancy's images and grows to something of great constancy, but, howsoever, strange and admirable."], ["here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth. joy, gentle friends! joy and fresh days of love accompany your hearts!", "more than to us wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!", "come now, what masques, what dances shall we have to wear away this long age of three hours between our after-supper and bedtime? where is our usual manager of mirth? what revels are in hand? is there no play, to ease the anguish of a torturing hour? call philostrate.", "here, mighty theseus.", "say, what abridgement have you for this evening? what masque, what music? how shall we beguile the lazy time if not with some delight?", "theseus there is a brief, how many sports are ripe. make choice of which your highness will see first.", "\"the battle with the centaurs, to be sung by an athenian eunuch to the harp.\" we'll none of that. that have i told my love, in glory of my kinsman hercules. \"the riot of the tipsy bacchanals, tearing the thracian singer in their rage.\" that is an old device, and it was played when i from thebes came last a conqueror."], ["\"the thrice three muses mourning for the death of learning, late deceased in beggary.\" that is some satire, keen and critical, not sorting with a nuptial ceremony. \"a tedious brief scene of young pyramus and his love thisbe. very tragical mirth.\" \"merry\" and \"tragical\"? \"tedious\" and \"brief\"? that is hot ice and wondrous strange snow. how shall we find the concord of this discord?", "a play there is, my lord, some ten words long, which is as brief as i have known a play. but by ten words, my lord, it is too long, which makes it tedious. for in all the play there is not one word apt, one player fitted. and tragical, my noble lord, it is. for pyramus therein doth kill himself. which, when i saw rehearsed, i must confess, made mine eyes water but more merry tears the passion of loud laughter never shed.", "what are they that do play it?", "hard-handed men that work in athens here, which never labored in their minds till now, and now have toiled their unbreathed memories with this same play against your nuptial.", "and we will hear it.", "no, my noble lord. it is not for you. i have heard it over, and it is nothing, nothing in the world unless you can find sport in their intents, extremely stretched and conned with cru 'l pain to do you service."], ["i will hear that play. for never anything can be amiss when simpleness and duty tender it. go, bring them in. and take your places, ladies.", "i love not to see wretchedness o'er charged and duty in his service perishing.", "why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.", "he says they can do nothing in this kind.", "the kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing. our sport shall be to take what they mistake. and what poor duty cannot do, noble respect takes it in might, not merit. where i have come, great clerks have purposd to greet me with premeditated welcomes, where i have seen them shiver and look pale, make periods in the midst of sentences, throttle their practiced accent in their fears, and in conclusion dumbly have broke off, not paying me a welcome. trust me, sweet, out of this silence yet i picked a welcome, and in the modesty of fearful duty i read as much as from the rattling tongue of saucy and audacious eloquence. love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity in least speak most, to my capacity."], ["so please your grace, the prologue is addressed.", "let him approach.", "quince if we offend, it is with our good will. that you should think we come not to offend, but with good will. to show our simple skill, that is the true beginning of our end. consider then we come but in despite. we do not come as minding to contest you, our true intent is. all for your delight we are not here. that you should here repent you, the actors are at hand, and by their show you shall know all that you are like to know.", "this fellow doth not stand upon points.", "he hath rid his prologue like a rough colt. he knows not the stop. a good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but to speak true.", "indeed he hath played on his prologue like a child on a recorder a sound, but not in government."], ["his speech was like a tangled chain. nothing impaired, but all disordered. who is next?", "quince gentles, perchance you wonder at this show. but wonder on, till truth make all things plain. this man is pyramus, if you would know. this beauteous lady thisbe is certain. this man, with lime and roughcast, doth present wall, that vile wall which did these lovers sunder. and through wall's chink, poor souls, they are content to whisper. at the which let no man wonder. this man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn, presenteth moonshine. for, if you will know, by moonshine did these lovers think no scorn to meet at ninus' tomb there, there to woo. this grisly beast, which \"lion\" hight by name, the trusty thisbe, coming first by night, did scare away, or rather did affright. and, as she fled, her mantle she did fall, which lion vile with bloody mouth did stain. anon comes pyramus, sweet youth and tall, and finds his trusty thisbe's mantle slain. whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade, he bravely broached his boiling bloody breast. and thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade, his dagger drew, and died. for all the rest, let lion, moonshine, wall, and lovers twain at large discourse, while here they do remain."], ["i wonder if the lion be to speak.", "no wonder, my lord. one lion may when many asses do.", "snout in this same interlude it doth befall that i, one snout by name, present a wall. and such a wall, as i would have you think, that had in it a crannied hole, or chink, through which the lovers, pyramus and thisbe, did whisper often very secretly. this loam, this roughcast, and this stone doth show that i am that same wall. the truth is so. and this the cranny is, right and sinister, through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.", "would you desire lime and hair to speak better?", "it is the wittiest partition that ever i heard discourse, my lord.", "pyramus draws near the wall. silence!", "bottom o grim-looked night! o night with hue so black! o night, which ever art when day is not! o night, o night! alack, alack, alack,"], ["i fear my thisbe's promise is forgot! and thou, o wall, o sweet, o lovely wall, that stand'st between her father's ground and mine. thou wall, o wall, o sweet and lovely wall, show me thy chink to blink through with mine eyne!", "thanks, courteous wall. jove shield thee well for this! but what see i? no thisbe do i see. o wicked wall through whom i see no bliss! cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me!", "the wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.", "no, in truth, sir, he should not. \"deceiving me\" is thisbe's cue. she is to enter now and i am to spy her through the wall. you shall see, it will fall pat as i told you. yonder she comes.", "flute o wall, full often hast thou heard my moans, for parting my fair pyramus and me! my cherry lips have often kissed thy stones, thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.", "i see a voice. now will i to the chink, to spy an i can hear my thisbe's face. thisbe?", "my love thou art, my love, i think."], ["think what thou wilt, i am thy lover's grace. and like limander am i trusty still.", "and i like helen, till the fates me kill.", "not shafalus to procrus was so true.", "as shafalus to procrus, i to you.", "oh, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall!", "i kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.", "wilt thou at ninny's tomb meet me straightway?", "tide life, tide death, i come without delay.", "thus have i, wall, my part dischargd so. and, being done, thus wall away doth go."], ["now is the mural down between the two neighbors.", "no remedy, my lord, when walls are so willful to hear without warning.", "this is the silliest stuff that ever i heard.", "the best in this kind are but shadows, and the worst are no worse if imagination amend them.", "it must be your imagination then, and not theirs.", "if we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves, they may pass for excellent men. here come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.", "snug you, ladies, you whose gentle hearts do fear the smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor, may now perchance both quake and tremble here, when lion rough in wildest rage doth roar. then know that i, as snug the joiner, am a lion fell, nor else no lion's dam. for if i should as lion come in strife into this place, 'twere pity on my life.", "a very gentle beast, of a good conscience.", "a very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er i saw."], ["this lion is a very fox, for his valor.", "true. and a goose for his discretion.", "not so, my lord. for his valor cannot carry his discretion, and the fox carries the goose.", "his discretion, i am sure, cannot carry his valor, for the goose carries not the fox. it is well. leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon.", "starveling this lanthorn doth the hornd moon present", "he should have worn the horns on his head.", "he is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the circumference.", "this lanthorn doth the hornd moon present. myself the man i' th' moon do seem to be", "this is the greatest error of all the rest. the man should be put into the lanthorn. how is it else the \"man i' th' moon\"?", "he dares not come there for the candle. for you see, it is already in snuff.", "i am aweary of this moon. would he would change!", "it appears by his small light of discretion, that he is in the wane. but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time."], ["proceed, moon.", "all that i have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is the moon; i, the man in the moon; this thornbush, my thornbush; and this dog, my dog.", "why, all these should be in the lanthorn, for all these are in the moon. but silence! here comes thisbe.", "this is old ninny's tomb. where is my love?", "oh!", "well roared, lion!", "well run, thisbe!", "well shone, moon! truly, the moon shines with a good grace.", "well moused, lion!"], ["and then came pyramus.", "and so the lion vanished.", "sweet moon, i thank thee for thy sunny beams. i thank thee, moon, for shining now so bright. for by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams, i trust to take of truest thisbe sight. but stay, o spite! but mark, poor knight, what dreadful dole is here! eyes, do you see? how can it be? o dainty duck! o dear! thy mantle good, what, stained with blood? approach, ye furies fell! o fates, come, come, cut thread and thrum. quail, crush, conclude, and quell!", "this passion and the death of a dear friend would go near to make a man look sad.", "beshrew my heart, but i pity the man.", "o wherefore, nature, didst thou lions frame? since lion vile hath here deflowered my dear, which is no, no which was the fairest dame that lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with cheer. come, tears, confound! out, sword, and wound! the pap of pyramus"], ["ay, that left pap where heart doth hop. thus die i, thus, thus, thus. now am i dead. now am i fled. my soul is in the sky. tongue, lose thy light. moon, take thy flight.", "now die, die, die, die, die.", "no die, but an ace for him, for he is but one.", "less than an ace, man. for he is dead. he is nothing.", "with the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and prove an ass.", "how chance moonshine is gone before thisbe comes back and finds her lover?", "she will find him by starlight. here she comes, and her passion ends the play.", "methinks she should not use a long one for such a pyramus. i hope she will be brief.", "a mote will turn the balance, which pyramus, which thisbe, is the better. he for a man, god warrant us, she for a woman, god bless us."], ["she hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.", "and thus she means, videlicet", "asleep, my love? what, dead, my dove? o pyramus, arise! speak, speak. quite dumb? dead, dead? a tomb must cover thy sweet eyes. these lily lips, this cherry nose, these yellow cowslip cheeks are gone, are gone. lovers, make moan. his eyes were green as leeks. o sisters three, come, come to me with hands as pale as milk. lay them in gore, since you have shore with shears his thread of silk. tongue, not a word. come, trusty sword. come, blade, my breast imbrue. and, farewell, friends. thus thisbe ends. adieu, adieu, adieu.", "moonshine and lion are left to bury the dead.", "ay, and wall too."], ["no, assure you. the wall is down that parted their fathers. will it please you to see the epilogue, or to hear a bergomask dance between two of our company?", "no epilogue, i pray you, for your play needs no excuse. never excuse for when the players are all dead, there needs none to be blamed. marry, if he that writ it had played pyramus and hanged himself in thisbe's garter, it would have been a fine tragedy. and so it is, truly, and very notably discharged. but come, your bergomask. let your epilogue alone.", "the iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve. lovers, to bed. 'tis almost fairy time. i fear we shall outsleep the coming morn as much as we this night have overwatched. this palpable-gross play hath well beguiled the heavy gait of night. sweet friends, to bed. a fortnight hold we this solemnity, in nightly revels and new jollity.", "now the hungry lion roars and the wolf behowls the moon, whilst the heavy ploughman snores, all with weary task fordone. now the wasted brands do glow, whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud, puts the wretch that lies in woe in remembrance of a shroud. now it is the time of night that the graves all gaping wide, every one lets forth his sprite, in the churchway paths to glide."], ["and we fairies, that do run by the triple hecate's team from the presence of the sun, following darkness like a dream, now are frolic. not a mouse shall disturb this hallowed house. i am sent with broom before to sweep the dust behind the door.", "through the house give glimmering light, by the dead and drowsy fire. every elf and fairy sprite hop as light as bird from brier. and this ditty, after me, sing and dance it trippingly.", "first, rehearse your song by rote, to each word a warbling note. hand in hand with fairy grace will we sing and bless this place.", ", . , . . . ."], [", , . , . . . . .", "if we shadows have offended, think but this, and all is mended that you have but slumbered here while these visions did appear. and this weak and idle theme, no more yielding but a dream, gentles, do not reprehend. if you pardon, we will mend. and, as i am an honest puck, if we have unearnd luck now to 'scape the serpent's tongue, we will make amends ere long. else the puck a liar call. so good night unto you all. give me your hands if we be friends, and robin shall restore amends."]], [["i learn in this letter that don pedro of aragon comes this night to messina.", "he is very near by this. he was not three leagues off when i left him.", "how many gentlemen have you lost in this action?", "but few of any sort, and none of name.", "a victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full numbers. i find here that don pedro hath bestowed much honor on a young florentine called claudio.", "much deserved on his part, and equally remembered by don pedro. he hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion. he hath indeed better bettered expectation than you must expect of me to tell you how.", "he hath an uncle here in messina will be very much glad of it."], ["i have already delivered him letters, and there appears much joy in him even so much that joy could not show itself modest enough without a badge of bitterness.", "did he break out into tears?", "in great measure.", "a kind overflow of kindness. there are no faces truer than those that are so washed. how much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping!", "i pray you, is signor montanto returned from the wars or no?", "i know none of that name, lady. there was none such in the army of any sort.", "what is he that you ask for, niece?", "my cousin means signor benedick of padua.", "oh, he's returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.", "he set up his bills here in messina and challenged cupid at the flight, and my uncle's fool, reading the challenge, subscribed for cupid and challenged him at the bird-bolt. i pray you, how many hath he killed and eaten in these wars? but how many hath he killed? for indeed i promised to eat all of his killing."], ["faith, niece, you tax signor benedick too much, but he'll be meet with you, i doubt it not.", "he hath done good service, lady, in these wars.", "you had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it. he is a very valiant trencherman. he hath an excellent stomach.", "and a good soldier too, lady.", "and a good soldier to a lady, but what is he to a lord?", "a lord to a lord, a man to a man, stuffed with all honorable virtues.", "it is so indeed. he is no less than a stuffed man. but for the stuffing well, we are all mortal.", "you must not, sir, mistake my niece. there is a kind of merry war betwixt signor benedick and her. they never meet but there's a skirmish of wit between them.", "alas, he gets nothing by that. in our last conflict four of his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man governed with one, so that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse, for it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable creature. who is his companion now? he hath every month a new sworn brother.", "is 't possible?"], ["very easily possible. he wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat; it ever changes with the next block.", "i see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.", "no. an he were, i would burn my study. but i pray you, who is his companion? is there no young squarer now that will make a voyage with him to the devil?", "he is most in the company of the right noble claudio.", "o lord, he will hang upon him like a disease! he is sooner caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. god help the noble claudio! if he have caught the benedick, it will cost him a thousand pound ere a be cured.", "i will hold friends with you, lady.", "do, good friend.", "you will never run mad, niece.", "no, not till a hot january.", "don pedro is approached.", "good signor leonato, are you come to meet your trouble? the fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it."], ["never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your grace, for trouble being gone, comfort should remain, but when you depart from me, sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.", "you embrace your charge too willingly. i think this is your daughter.", "her mother hath many times told me so.", "were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?", "signor benedick, no, for then were you a child.", "you have it full, benedick. we may guess by this what you are, being a man. truly, the lady fathers herself. be happy, lady, for you are like an honorable father.", "if signor leonato be her father, she would not have his head on her shoulders for all messina, as like him as she is.", "i wonder that you will still be talking, signor benedick. nobody marks you.", "what, my dear lady disdain! are you yet living?"], ["is it possible disdain should die while she hath such meet food to feed it as signor benedick? courtesy itself must convert to disdain if you come in her presence.", "then is courtesy a turncoat. but it is certain i am loved of all ladies, only you excepted. and i would i could find in my heart that i had not a hard heart, for truly i love none.", "a dear happiness to women. they would else have been troubled with a pernicious suitor. i thank god and my cold blood i am of your humor for that. i had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than a man swear he loves me.", "god keep your ladyship still in that mind, so some gentle- man or other shall 'scape a predestinate scratched face.", "scratching could not make it worse an 'twere such a face as yours were.", "well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.", "a bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.", "i would my horse had the speed of your tongue and so good a continuer. but keep your way, i' god's name. i have done.", "you always end with a jade's trick. i know you of old.", "that is the sum of all, leonato. signior claudio and signior benedick, my dear friend leonato hath invited you all. i tell him we shall stay here at the least a month, and he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer. i dare swear he is no hypocrite but prays from his heart."], ["if you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn. don john let me bid you welcome, my lord. being reconciled to the prince your brother, i owe you all duty.", "i thank you. i am not of many words, but i thank you.", "please it your grace lead on?", "your hand, leonato. we will go together.", "benedick, didst thou note the daughter of signior leonato?", "i noted her not, but i looked on her.", "is she not a modest young lady?", "do you question me as an honest man should do, for my simple true judgment? or would you have me speak after my custom, as being a professed tyrant to their sex?", "no, i pray thee speak in sober judgment.", "why, i' faith, methinks she's too low for a high praise, too brown for a fair praise, and too little for a great praise. only this commendation i can afford her, that were she other than she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she is, i do not like her.", "thou thinkest i am in sport. i pray thee tell me truly how thou lik'st her."], ["would you buy her, that you enquire after her?", "can the world buy such a jewel?", "yea, and a case to put it into. but speak you this with a sad brow? or do you play the flouting jack, to tell us cupid is a good hare-finder and vulcan a rare carpenter? come, in what key shall a man take you to go in the song?", "in mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever i looked on.", "i can see yet without spectacles, and i see no such matter. there's her cousin, an she were not possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty as the first of may doth the last of december. but i hope you have no intent to turn husband, have you?", "i would scarce trust myself, though i had sworn the contrary, if hero would be my wife.", "is 't come to this? in faith, hath not the world one man but he will wear his cap with suspicion? shall i never see a bachelor of three-score again? go to, i' faith, an thou wilt needs thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it, and sigh away sundays. look, don pedro is returned to seek you."], ["what secret hath held you here that you followed not to leonato's?", "i would your grace would constrain me to tell.", "i charge thee on thy allegiance.", "you hear, count claudio? i can be secret as a dumb man, i would have you think so, but on my allegiance mark you this, on my allegiance don pedro he is in love. with who? now, that is your grace's part. mark how short his answer is: with hero, leonato's short daughter.", "if this were so, so were it uttered.", "like the old tale, my lord: \"it is not so nor 'twas not so but, indeed, god forbid it should be so.\"", "if my passion change not shortly, god forbid it should be otherwise.", "amen, if you love her, for the lady is very well worthy.", "you speak this to fetch me in, my lord.", "by my troth, i speak my thought.", "and, in faith, my lord, i spoke mine."], ["and by my two faiths and troths, my lord, i spoke mine.", "that i love her, i feel.", "that she is worthy, i know.", "that i neither feel how she should be loved nor know how she should be worthy is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me. i will die in it at the stake.", "thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of beauty.", "and never could maintain his part but in the force of his will.", "that a woman conceived me, i thank her. that she brought me up, i likewise give her most humble thanks. but that i will have a recheat winded in my forehead or hang my bugle in an invisible baldrick, all women shall pardon me. because i will not do them the wrong to mistrust any, i will do myself the right to trust none. and the fine is, for the which i may go the finer, i will live a bachelor.", "i shall see thee, ere i die, look pale with love.", "with anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my lord, not with love. prove that ever i lose more blood with love than i will get again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of blind cupid."], ["well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou wilt prove a notable argument.", "if i do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me, and he that hits me, let him be clapped on the shoulder and called adam.", "well, as time shall try. in time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.", "the savage bull may, but if ever the sensible benedick bear it, pluck off the bull's horns and set them in my forehead, and let me be vilely painted, and in such great letters as they write \"here is good horse to hire\" let them signify under my sign \"here you may see benedick the married man.\"", "if this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.", "nay, if cupid have not spent all his quiver in venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.", "i look for an earthquake too, then.", "well, you temporize with the hours. in the meantime, good signior benedick, repair to leonato's. commend me to him and tell him i will not fail him at supper, for indeed he hath made great preparation.", "i have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage, and so i commit you"], ["to the tuition of god. from my house, if i had it", "the sixth of july. your loving friend, benedick.", "nay, mock not, mock not. the body of your discourse is sometimes guarded with fragments and the guards are but slightly basted on neither. ere you flout old ends any further, examine your conscience. and so i leave you.", "my liege, your highness now may do me good.", "my love is thine to teach. teach it but how, and thou shalt see how apt it is to learn any hard lesson that may do thee good.", "hath leonato any son, my lord?", "no child but hero; she's his only heir. dost thou affect her, claudio?", "o, my lord, when you went onward on this ended action, i looked upon her with a soldier's eye, that liked but had a rougher task in hand than to drive liking to the name of love. but now i am returned and that war thoughts have left their places vacant, in their rooms come thronging soft and delicate desires, all prompting me how fair young hero is, saying i liked her ere i went to wars."], ["thou wilt be like a lover presently and tire the hearer with a book of words. if thou dost love fair hero, cherish it, and i will break with her and with her father, and thou shalt have her. was 't not to this end that thou began'st to twist so fine a story?", "how sweetly you do minister to love, that know love's grief by his complexion! but lest my liking might too sudden seem, i would have salved it with a longer treatise.", "what need the bridge much broader than the flood? the fairest grant is the necessity. look what will serve is fit. 'tis once, thou lovest, and i will fit thee with the remedy. i know we shall have reveling tonight. i will assume thy part in some disguise and tell fair hero i am claudio, and in her bosom i'll unclasp my heart and take her hearing prisoner with the force and strong encounter of my amorous tale. then after to her father will i break, and the conclusion is, she shall be thine. in practice let us put it presently."], ["how now, brother, where is my cousin, your son? hath he provided this music?", "he is very busy about it. but, brother, i can tell you strange news that you yet dreamt not of.", "are they good?", "as the events stamps them, but they have a good cover; they show well outward. the prince and count claudio, walking in a thick-pleached alley in mine orchard, were thus much overheard by a man of mine: the prince discovered to claudio that he loved my niece your daughter and meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the present time by the top and instantly break with you of it.", "hath the fellow any wit that told you this?", "a good sharp fellow. i will send for him, and question him yourself."], ["no, no, we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself. but i will acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better prepared for an answer if peradventure this be true. go you and tell her of it.", "cousins, you know what you have to do. o, i cry you mercy, friend. go you with me and i will use your skill. good cousin, have a care this busy time."], ["what the goodyear, my lord, why are you thus out of measure sad?", "there is no measure in the occasion that breeds. therefore the sadness is without limit.", "you should hear reason.", "and when i have heard it, what blessing brings it?", "if not a present remedy, at least a patient sufferance.", "i wonder that thou, being, as thou sayst thou art, born under saturn, goest about to apply a moral medicine to a mortifying mischief. i cannot hide what i am. i must be sad when i have cause and smile at no man's jests, eat when i have stomach and wait for no man's leisure, sleep when i am drowsy and tend on no man's business, laugh when i am merry and claw no man in his humor.", "yea, but you must not make the full show of this till you may do it without controlment. you have of late stood out against your brother, and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace, where it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair weather that you make yourself. it is needful that you frame the season for your own harvest."], ["i had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace, and it better fits my blood to be disdained of all than to fashion a carriage to rob love from any. in this, though i cannot be said to be a flattering honest man, it must not be denied but i am a plain-dealing villain. i am trusted with a muzzle and enfranchised with a clog; therefore i have decreed not to sing in my cage. if i had my mouth, i would bite; if i had my liberty, i would do my liking. in the meantime, let me be that i am, and seek not to alter me.", "can you make no use of your discontent?", "i make all use of it, for i use it only. who comes here?", "what news, borachio?", "i came yonder from a great supper. the prince your brother is royally entertained by leonato, and i can give you intelligence of an intended marriage.", "will it serve for any model to build mischief on? what is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness?", "marry, it is your brother's right hand.", "who? the most exquisite claudio?", "even he."], ["a proper squire. and who, and who? which way looks he?", "marry, on hero, the daughter and heir of leonato.", "a very forward march-chick! how came you to this?", "being entertained for a perfumer, as i was smoking a musty room, comes me the prince and claudio, hand in hand, in sad conference. i whipped me behind the arras, and there heard it agreed upon that the prince should woo hero for himself, and having obtained her, give her to count claudio.", "come, come, let us thither. this may prove food to my displeasure. that young start-up hath all the glory of my overthrow. if i can cross him any way, i bless myself every way. you are both sure, and will assist me?", "to the death, my lord.", "let us to the great supper. their cheer is the greater that i am subdued. would the cook were o' my mind! shall we go prove what's to be done?", "we'll wait upon your lordship."], ["was not count john here at supper?", "i saw him not.", "how tartly that gentleman looks! i never can see him but i am heartburned an hour after.", "he is of a very melancholy disposition.", "he were an excellent man that were made just in the midway between him and benedick. the one is too like an image and says nothing, and the other too like my lady's eldest son, evermore tattling.", "then half signor benedick's tongue in count john's mouth, and half count john's melancholy in signor benedick's face", "with a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money enough in his purse, such a man would win any woman in the world, if he could get her goodwill.", "by my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.", "in faith, she's too curst."], ["too curst is more than curst. i shall lessen god's sending that way, for it is said, \"god sends a curst cow short horns,\" but to a cow too curst, he sends none.", "so, by being too curst, god will send you no horns.", "just, if he send me no husband, for the which blessing i am at him upon my knees every morning and evening. lord, i could not endure a husband with a beard on his face! i had rather lie in the woolen.", "you may light on a husband that hath no beard.", "what should i do with him? dress him in my apparel and make him my waiting gentlewoman? he that hath a beard is more than a youth, and he that hath no beard is less than a man; and he that is more than a youth is not for me, and he that is less than a man, i am not for him. therefore i will even take sixpence in earnest of the bearherd, and lead his apes into hell.", "well then, go you into hell?", "no, but to the gate, and there will the devil meet me like an old cuckold with horns on his head, and say, \"get you to heaven, beatrice, get you to heaven; here's no place for you maids.\" so deliver i up my apes and away to saint peter. for the heavens, he shows me where the bachelors sit, and there live we as merry as the day is long."], ["hero well, niece, i trust you will be ruled by your father.", "yes, faith, it is my cousin's duty to make curtsy and say, \"father, as it please you.\" but yet for all that, cousin, let him be a handsome fellow, or else make another curtsy and say, \"father, as it please me.\"", "well, niece, i hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.", "not till god make men of some other metal than earth. would it not grieve a woman to be overmastered with a piece of valiant dust? to make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl? no, uncle, i'll none. adam's sons are my brethren, and truly i hold it a sin to match in my kindred.", "hero daughter, remember what i told you. if the prince do solicit you in that kind, you know your answer.", "the fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed in good time. if the prince be too important, tell him there is measure in everything, and so dance out the answer. for hear me, hero, wooing, wedding, and repenting is as a scotch jig, a measure, and a cinquepace. the first suit is hot and hasty like a scotch jig, and full as fantastical; the wedding, mannerly modest as a measure, full of state and ancientry; and then comes repentance, and with his bad legs falls into the cinquepace faster and faster till he sink into his grave."], ["cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.", "i have a good eye, uncle. i can see a church by daylight.", "the revelers are entering, brother. make good room.", "lady, will you walk a bout with your friend?", "so you walk softly, and look sweetly, and say nothing, i am yours for the walk, and especially when i walk away.", "with me in your company?", "i may say so when i please.", "and when please you to say so?", "when i like your favor, for god defend the lute should be like the case!", "my visor is philemon's roof; within the house is jove."], ["why, then, your visor should be thatched.", "speak low if you speak love.", "well, i would you did like me.", "so would not i for your own sake, for i have many ill qualities.", "which is one?", "i say my prayers aloud.", "i love you the better; the hearers may cry \"amen.\"", "god match me with a good dancer!", "amen.", "and god keep him out of my sight when the dance is done! answer, clerk.", "no more words. the clerk is answered.", "i know you well enough. you are signor antonio.", "at a word, i am not.", "i know you by the waggling of your head."], ["to tell you true, i counterfeit him.", "you could never do him so ill-well unless you were the very man. here's his dry hand up and down. you are he, you are he.", "at a word, i am not.", "come, come, do you think i do not know you by your excellent wit? can virtue hide itself? go to, mum, you are he. graces will appear, and there's an end.", "will you not tell me who told you so?", "no, you shall pardon me.", "nor will you not tell me who you are?", "not now.", "that i was disdainful and that i had my good wit out of the hundred merry tales! well this was signor benedick that said so.", "what's he?", "i am sure you know him well enough.", "not i, believe me.", "did he never make you laugh?"], ["i pray you, what is he?", "why, he is the prince's jester, a very dull fool, only his gift is in devising impossible slanders. none but libertines delight in him, and the commendation is not in his wit but in his villainy, for he both pleases men and angers them, and then they laugh at him and beat him. i am sure he is in the fleet. i would he had boarded me.", "when i know the gentleman, i'll tell him what you say.", "do, do. he'll but break a comparison or two on me, which, peradventure not marked or not laughed at, strikes him into melancholy, and then there's a partridge wing saved, for the fool will eat no supper that night.", "we must follow the leaders.", "in every good thing.", "nay, if they lead to any ill, i will leave them at the next turning.", "borachio sure my brother is amorous on hero, and hath withdrawn her father to break with him about it. the ladies follow her, and but one visor remains."], ["and that is claudio. i know him by his bearing.", "claudio are not you signor benedick?", "you know me well. i am he.", "signor, you are very near my brother in his love. he is enamored on hero. i pray you, dissuade him from her. she is no equal for his birth. you may do the part of an honest man in it.", "how know you he loves her?", "i heard him swear his affection.", "so did i too, and he swore he would marry her tonight.", "come, let us to the banquet.", "thus answer i in the name of benedick, but hear these ill news with the ears of claudio. 'tis certain so, the prince woos for himself. friendship is constant in all other things save in the office and affairs of love. therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues. let every eye nogetiate for itself and trust no agent, for beauty is a witch against whose charms faith melteth into blood. this is an accident of hourly proof, which i mistrusted not. farewell, therefore, hero."], ["count claudio?", "yea, the same.", "come, will you go with me?", "whither?", "even to the next willow, about your own business, county. what fashion will you wear the garland of? about your neck like an usurer's chain? or under your arm like a lieutenant's scarf? you must wear it one way, for the prince hath gat your hero.", "i wish him joy of her.", "why, that's spoken like an honest drover; so they sell bullocks. but did you think the prince would have served you thus?", "i pray you, leave me.", "ho, now you strike like the blind man. 'twas the boy that stole your meat, and you'll beat the post.", "if it will not be, i'll leave you."], ["alas, poor hurt fowl, now will he creep into sedges. but that my lady beatrice should know me, and not know me! the prince's fool! ha, it may be i go under that title because i am merry. yea, but so i am apt to do myself wrong. i am not so reputed! it is the base, though bitter, disposition of beatrice that puts the world into her person and so gives me out. well, i'll be revenged as i may.", "now, signior, where's the count? did you see him?", "troth, my lord, i have played the part of lady fame. i found him here as melancholy as a lodge in a warren. i told him, and i think i told him true, that your grace had got the goodwill of this young lady, and i offered him my company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or to bind him up a rod, as being worthy to be whipped.", "to be whipped? what's his fault?", "the flat transgression of a schoolboy who, being overjoyed with finding a birds' nest, shows it his companion, and he steals it.", "wilt thou make a trust a transgression? the transgression is in the stealer."], ["yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the garland too, for the garland he might have worn himself and the rod he might have bestowed on you, who, as i take it, have stolen his birds' nest.", "i will but teach them to sing and restore them to the owner.", "if their singing answer your saying, by my faith, you say honestly.", "the lady beatrice hath a quarrel to you. the gentleman that danced with her told her she is much wronged by you.", "o, she misused me past the endurance of a block! an oak but with one green leaf on it would have answered her. my very visor began to assume life and scold with her. she told me, not thinking i had been myself, that i was the prince's jester, that i was duller than a great thaw, huddling jest upon jest with such impossible conveyance upon me that i stood like a man at a mark with a whole army shooting at me. she speaks poniards, and every word stabs. if her breath were as terrible as her terminations, there were no living near her; she would infect to the north star. i would not marry her, though she were endowed with all that adam had left him before he transgressed. she would have made hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make the fire, too. come, talk not of her. you shall find her the infernal ate in good apparel. i would to god some scholar would conjure her, for certainly, while she is here, a man may live as quiet in hell as in a sanctuary, and people sin upon purpose because they would go thither. so indeed all disquiet, horror and perturbation follows her."], ["look, here she comes.", "will your grace command me any service to the world's end? i will go on the slightest errand now to the antipodes that you can devise to send me on. i will fetch you a toothpicker now from the furthest inch of asia, bring you the length of prester john's foot, fetch you a hair off the great cham's beard, do you any embassage to the pygmies, rather than hold three words' conference with this harpy. you have no employment for me?", "none but to desire your good company.", "o god, sir, here's a dish i love not. i cannot endure my lady tongue!", "beatrice come, lady, come, you have lost the heart of signior benedick.", "indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile, and i gave him use for it, a double heart for his single one. marry, once before he won it of me with false dice. therefore your grace may well say i have lost it.", "you have put him down, lady, you have put him down."], ["so i would not he should do me, my lord, lest i should prove the mother of fools. i have brought count claudio, whom you sent me to seek.", "why, how now, count, wherefore are you sad?", "not sad, my lord.", "how then, sick?", "neither, my lord.", "the count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well, but civil count, civil as an orange, and something of that jealous complexion.", "i' faith, lady, i think your blazon to be true, though, i'll be sworn, if he be so, his conceit is false. here, claudio, i have wooed in thy name, and fair hero is won. i have broke with her father and his goodwill obtained. name the day of marriage, and god give thee joy.", "count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes. his grace hath made the match, and all grace say \"amen\" to it.", "speak, count, 'tis your cue.", "silence is the perfectest herald of joy. i were but little happy if i could say how much. lady, as you are mine, i am yours. i give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange."], ["speak, cousin, or if you cannot, stop his mouth with a kiss and let not him speak neither.", "in faith, lady, you have a merry heart.", "yea, my lord. i thank it, poor fool, it keeps on the windy side of care. my cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her heart.", "and so she doth, cousin.", "good lord for alliance! thus goes everyone to the world but i, and i am sunburnt. i may sit in a corner and cry, \"heigh-ho for a husband!\"", "lady beatrice, i will get you one.", "i would rather have one of your father's getting. hath your grace ne'er a brother like you? your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by them.", "will you have me, lady?", "no, my lord, unless i might have another for working days. your grace is too costly to wear every day. but i beseech your grace pardon me. i was born to speak all mirth and no matter.", "your silence most offends me, and to be merry best becomes you, for out o' question you were born in a merry hour."], ["no, sure, my lord, my mother cried, but then there was a star danced, and under that was i born. cousins, god give you joy!", "niece, will you look to those things i told you of?", "i cry you mercy, uncle. by your grace's pardon.", "by my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.", "there's little of the melancholy element in her, my lord. she is never sad but when she sleeps, and not ever sad then, for i have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked herself with laughing.", "she cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.", "oh, by no means. she mocks all her wooers out of suit.", "she were an excellent wife for benedict.", "o lord, my lord, if they were but a week married, they would talk themselves mad.", "county claudio, when mean you to go to church?", "tomorrow, my lord. time goes on crutches till love have all his rites."], ["not till monday, my dear son, which is hence a just sevennight, and a time too brief, too, to have all things answer my mind.", "claudio come, you shake the head at so long a breathing, but i warrant thee, claudio, the time shall not go dully by us. i will in the interim undertake one of hercules' labors, which is to bring signor benedick and the lady beatrice into a mountain of affection, th' one with th' other. i would fain have it a match, and i doubt not but to fashion it, if you three will but minister such assistance as i shall give you direction.", "my lord, i am for you, though it cost me ten nights' watchings.", "and i, my lord.", "and you too, gentle hero?", "i will do any modest office, my lord, to help my cousin to a good husband.", "and benedick is not the unhopefulest husband that i know. thus far can i praise him: he is of a noble strain, of approved valor, and confirmed honesty. i will teach you how to humor your cousin that she shall fall in love with benedick. and i, with your two helps, will so practice on benedick that, in despite of his quick wit and his queasy stomach, he shall fall in love with beatrice. if we can do this, cupid is no longer an archer; his glory shall be ours, for we are the only love gods. go in with me, and i will tell you my drift."], ["it is so. the count claudio shall marry the daughter of leonato.", "yea, my lord, but i can cross it.", "any bar, any cross, any impediment will be med'cinable to me. i am sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine. how canst thou cross this marriage?", "not honestly, my lord, but so covertly that no dishonesty shall appear in me.", "show me briefly how.", "i think i told your lordship a year since how much i am in the favor of margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to hero.", "i remember.", "i can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her to look out at her lady's chamber window.", "what life is in that to be the death of this marriage?", "the poison of that lies in you to temper. go you to the prince your brother. spare not to tell him that he hath wronged his honor in marrying the renowned claudio, whose estimation do you mightily hold up, to a contaminated stale, such a one as hero."], ["what proof shall i make of that?", "proof enough to misuse the prince, to vex claudio, to undo hero, and kill leonato. look you for any other issue?", "only to despite them, i will endeavor anything.", "go then, find me a meet hour to draw don pedro and the count claudio alone. tell them that you know that hero loves me. intend a kind of zeal both to the prince and claudio, as in love of your brother's honor, who hath made this match, and his friend's reputation, who is thus like to be cozened with the semblance of a maid, that you have discovered thus. they will scarcely believe this without trial. offer them instances, which shall bear no less likelihood than to see me at her chamber window, hear me call margaret \"hero,\" hear margaret term me \"claudio,\" and bring them to see this the very night before the intended wedding, for in the meantime i will so fashion the matter that hero shall be absent, and there shall appear such seeming truth of hero's disloyalty that jealousy shall be called assurance and all the preparation overthrown.", "grow this to what adverse issue it can, i will put it in practice. be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a thousand ducats.", "be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not shame me.", "i will presently go learn their day of marriage."], ["boy!", "signior?", "in my chamber window lies a book. bring it hither to me in the orchard.", "i am here already, sir.", "i know that, but i would have thee hence and here again.", "i do much wonder that one man, seeing how much another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviors to love, will, after he hath laughed at such shallow follies in others, become the argument of his own scorn by falling in love and such a man is claudio. i have known when there was no music with him but the drum and the fife, and now had he rather hear the tabor and the pipe. i have known when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see a good armor, and now will he lie ten nights awake carving the fashion of a new doublet. he was wont to speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography; his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many strange dishes. may i be so converted and see with these eyes? i cannot tell; i think not."], ["i will not be sworn but love may transform me to an oyster, but i'll take my oath on it, till he have made an oyster of me, he shall never make me such a fool. one woman is fair, yet i am well; another is wise, yet i am well; another virtuous, yet i am well; but till all graces be in one woman, one woman shall not come in my grace. rich she shall be, that's certain; wise, or i'll none; virtuous, or i'll never cheapen her; fair, or i'll ever look on her; mild, or come not near me; noble, or not i for an angel; of good discourse, an excellent musician, and her hair shall be of what color it please god. ha! the prince and monsieur love! i will hide me in the arbor.", "come, shall we hear this music?", "yea, my good lord. how still the evening is, as hushed on purpose to grace harmony!", "claudio see you where benedick hath hid himself?", "don pedro o, very well, my lord. the music ended, we'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.", "come, balthasar, we'll hear that song again."], ["o, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice to slander music anymore than once.", "it is the witness still of excellency to put a strange face on his own perfection. i pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more.", "because you talk of wooing, i will sing, since many a wooer doth commence his suit to her he thinks not worthy, yet he woos, yet will he swear he loves.", "nay, pray thee, come, or, if thou wilt hold longer argument, do it in notes.", "note this before my notes: there's not a note of mine that's worth the noting.", "why, these are very crotchets that he speaks! note notes, forsooth, and nothing.", "now, divine air! now is his soul ravished. is it not strange that sheeps' guts should hale souls out of men's bodies? well, a horn for my money, when all's done."], [", , , . , , . . , . , .", "by my troth, a good song.", "and an ill singer, my lord.", "ha, no, no, faith, thou sing'st well enough for a shift.", "an he had been a dog that should have howled thus, they would have hanged him. and i pray god his bad voice bode no mischief. i had as lief have heard the night raven, come what plague could have come after it.", "yea, marry, dost thou hear, balthasar? i pray thee, get us some excellent music, for tomorrow night we would have it at the lady hero's chamber window"], ["the best i can, my lord.", "do so. farewell.", "come hither, leonato. what was it you told me of today, that your niece beatrice was in love with signor benedick?", "oh, ay. don pedro stalk on, stalk on; the fowl sits. i did never think that lady would have loved any man.", "no, nor i neither, but most wonderful that she should so dote on signor benedick, whom she hath in all outward behaviors seemed ever to abhor.", "is 't possible? sits the wind in that corner?", "by my troth, my lord, i cannot tell what to think of it, but that she loves him with an enraged affection, it is past the infinite of thought.", "may be she doth but counterfeit.", "faith, like enough.", "o god! counterfeit? there was never counterfeit of passion came so near the life of passion as she discovers it.", "why, what effects of passion shows she?", "leonato bait the hook well; this fish will bite."], ["what effects, my lord? she will sit you you heard my daughter tell you how.", "she did indeed.", "how, how i pray you? you amaze me. i would have thought her spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.", "i would have sworn it had, my lord, especially against benedick.", "i should think this a gull but that the white-bearded fellow speaks it. knavery cannot, sure, hide himself in such reverence.", "don pedro he hath ta'en th' infection. hold it up.", "hath she made her affection known to benedick?", "no, and swears she never will. that's her torment.", "'tis true indeed, so your daughter says. \"shall i,\" says she, \"that have so oft encountered him with scorn, write to him that i love him?\"", "this says she now when she is beginning to write to him, for she'll be up twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her smock till she have writ a sheet of paper. my daughter tells us all.", "now you talk of a sheet of paper, i remember a pretty jest your daughter told."], ["oh, when she had writ it and was reading it over, she found \"benedick\" and \"beatrice\" between the sheet?", "that.", "o, she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence, railed at herself that she should be so immodest to write to one that she knew would flout her. \"i measure him,\" says she, \"by my own spirit, for i should flout him if he writ to me, yea, though i love him, i should.\"", "then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs, beats her heart, tears her hair, prays, curses: \"o sweet benedick! god give me patience!\"", "she doth indeed, my daughter says so, and the ecstasy hath so much overborne her that my daughter is sometime afeared she will do a desperate outrage to herself. it is very true.", "it were good that benedick knew of it by some other, if she will not discover it.", "to what end? he would make but a sport of it and torment the poor lady worse.", "an he should, it were an alms to hang him. she's an excellent sweet lady, and, out of all suspicion, she is virtuous.", "and she is exceeding wise.", "in every thing but in loving benedick."], ["oh, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body, we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory. i am sorry for her, as i have just cause, being her uncle and her guardian.", "i would she had bestowed this dotage on me. i would have daffed all other respects and made her half myself. i pray you tell benedick of it and hear what he will say.", "were it good, think you?", "hero thinks surely she will die, for she says she will die if he love her not, and she will die ere she make her love known, and she will die if he woo her rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed crossness.", "she doth well. if she should make tender of her love, 'tis very possible he'll scorn it, for the man, as you know all, hath a contemptible spirit.", "he is a very proper man.", "he hath indeed a good outward happiness.", "before god, and in my mind, very wise.", "he doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.", "and i take him to be valiant.", "as hector, i assure you, and in the managing of quarrels you may say he is wise, for either he avoids them with great discretion or undertakes them with a most christian-like fear."], ["if he do fear god, he must necessarily keep peace. if he break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.", "and so will he do, for the man doth fear god, howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests he will make. well, i am sorry for your niece. shall we go seek benedick and tell him of her love?", "never tell him, my lord, let her wear it out with good counsel.", "nay, that's impossible. she may wear her heart out first.", "well, we will hear further of it by your daughter. let it cool the while. i love benedick well, and i could wish he would modestly examine himself to see how much he is unworthy so good a lady.", "my lord, will you walk? dinner is ready.", "don pedro leonato if he do not dote on her upon this, i will never trust my expectation.", "leonato let there be the same net spread for her, and that must your daughter and her gentlewomen carry. the sport will be when they hold one an opinion of another's dotage, and no such matter. that's the scene that i would see, which will be merely a dumb show. let us send her to call him in to dinner."], ["this can be no trick. the conference was sadly borne; they have the truth of this from hero; they seem to pity the lady. it seems her affections have their full bent. love me? why, it must be requited! i hear how i am censured. they sy i will bear myself proudly if i perceive the love come from her. they say, too, that she will rather die than give any sign of affection. i did never think to marry. i must not seem proud. happy are they that hear their detractions and can put them to mending. they say the lady is fair; 'tis a truth, i can bear them witness. and virtuous; 'tis so, i cannot reprove it. and wise, but for loving me; by my troth, it is no addition to her wit, nor no great argument of her folly, for i will be horribly in love with her! i may chance have some odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me because i have railed so long against marriage, but doth not the appetite alter? a man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure in his age. shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of the brain awe a man from the career of his humor? no! the world must be peopled. when i said i would die a bachelor, i did not think i should live till i were married. here comes beatrice. by this day, she's a fair lady. i do spy some marks of love in her.", "against my will, i am sent to bid you come in to dinner.", "fair beatrice, i thank you for your pains."], ["i took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to thank me. if it had been painful, i would not have come.", "you take pleasure then in the message?", "yea, just so much as you may take upon a knife's point and choke a daw withal. you have no stomach, signior. fare you well.", "ha! \"against my will i am sent to bid you come in to dinner.\" there's a double meaning in that. \"i took no more pains for those thanks than you took pains to thank me.\" that's as much as to say, \"any pains that i take for you is as easy as thanks.\" if i do not take pity of her, i am a villain. if i do not love her, i am a jew. i will go get her picture."], ["good margaret, run thee to the parlor. there shalt thou find my cousin beatrice proposing with the prince and claudio. whisper her ear and tell her i and ursula walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse is all of her. say that thou overheardst us, and bid her steal into the pleachd bower where honeysuckles ripened by the sun forbid the sun to enter, like favorites made proud by princes, that advance their pride against that power that bred it. there will she hide her to listen our propose. this is thy office. bear thee well in it and leave us alone.", "i'll make her come, i warrant you, presently.", "now, ursula, when beatrice doth come, as we do trace this alley up and down, our talk must only be of benedick. when i do name him, let it be thy part to praise him more than ever man did merit. my talk to thee must be how benedick is sick in love with beatrice. of this matter is little cupid's crafty arrow made, that only wounds by hearsay."], ["now begin, for look where beatrice like a lapwing runs close by the ground, to hear our conference.", "hero the pleasant'st angling is to see the fish cut with her golden oars the silver stream and greedily devour the treacherous bait. so angle we for beatrice, who even now is couchd in the woodbine coverture. fear you not my part of the dialogue.", "ursula then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing of the false sweet bait that we lay for it. no, truly, ursula, she is too disdainful. i know her spirits are as coy and wild as haggards of the rock.", "but are you sure that benedick loves beatrice so entirely?", "so says the prince and my new-trothd lord.", "and did they bid you tell her of it, madam?", "they did entreat me to acquaint her of it, but i persuaded them, if they loved benedick, to wish him wrestle with affection and never to let beatrice know of it.", "why did you so? doth not the gentleman deserve as full as fortunate a bed as ever beatrice shall couch upon?"], ["o god of love! i know he doth deserve as much as may be yielded to a man, but nature never framed a woman's heart of prouder stuff than that of beatrice. disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes, misprizing what they look on, and her wit values itself so highly that to her all matter else seems weak. she cannot love nor take no shape nor project of affection she is so self-endeared.", "sure, i think so, and therefore certainly it were not good she knew his love, lest she make sport at it.", "why, you speak truth. i never yet saw man, how wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured but she would spell him backward. if fair-faced, she would swear the gentleman should be her sister; if black, why, nature, drawing of an antic, made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed; if low, an agate very vilely cut; if speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds; if silent, why, a block moved with none. so turns she every man the wrong side out and never gives to truth and virtue that which simpleness and merit purchaseth.", "sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.", "no, not to be so odd and from all fashions as beatrice is, cannot be commendable. but who dare tell her so? if i should speak, she would mock me into air. o, she would laugh me out of myself, press me to death with wit."], ["therefore let benedick, like covered fire, consume away in sighs, waste inwardly. it were a better death than die with mocks, which is as bad as die with tickling.", "yet tell her of it. hear what she will say.", "no, rather i will go to benedick and counsel him to fight against his passion; and truly i'll devise some honest slanders to stain my cousin with. one doth not know how much an ill word may empoison liking.", "o, do not do your cousin such a wrong! she cannot be so much without true judgment, having so swift and excellent a wit as she is prized to have, as to refuse so rare a gentleman as signior benedick.", "he is the only man of italy, always excepted my dear claudio.", "i pray you, be not angry with me, madam, speaking my fancy. signor benedick, for shape, for bearing, argument and valor, goes foremost in report through italy.", "indeed, he hath an excellent good name.", "his excellence did earn it, ere he had it. when are you married, madam?"], ["why, every day, tomorrow. come, go in. i'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel which is the best to furnish me tomorrow.", "hero she's limed, i warrant you. we have caught her, madam.", "ursula if it proves so, then loving goes by haps; some cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.", "what fire is in mine ears? can this be true? stand i condemned for pride and scorn so much? contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adieu! no glory lives behind the back of such. and benedick, love on; i will requite thee, taming my wild heart to thy loving hand. if thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee to bind our loves up in a holy band. for others say thou dost deserve, and i believe it better than reportingly."], ["i do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go i toward aragon.", "i'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe me.", "nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it. i will only be bold with benedick for his company, for from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot he is all mirth. he hath twice or thrice cut cupid's bow-string, and the little hangman dare not shoot at him. he hath a heart as sound as a bell, and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.", "gallants, i am not as i have been.", "so say i. methinks you are sadder.", "i hope he be in love.", "hang him, truant! there's no true drop of blood in him to be truly touched with love. if he be sad, he wants money.", "i have the toothache.", "draw it.", "hang it!", "you must hang it first, and draw it afterwards."], ["what, sigh for the toothache?", "where is but a humor or a worm.", "well, everyone can master a grief but he that has it.", "yet say i, he is in love.", "there is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy that he hath to strange disguises, as to be a dutchman today, a frenchman tomorrow, or in the shape of two countries at once, as a german from the waist downward, all slops, and a spaniard from the hip upward, no doublet. unless he have a fancy to this foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no fool for fancy, as you would have it appear he is.", "if he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing old signs. he brushes his hat o' mornings. what should that bode?", "hath any man seen him at the barber's?", "no, but the barber's man hath been seen with him, and the old ornament of his cheek hath already stuffed tennis balls.", "indeed, he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.", "nay, he rubs himself with civet. can you smell him out by that?"], ["that's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.", "the greatest note of it is his melancholy.", "and when was he wont to wash his face?", "yea, or to paint himself? for the which i hear what they say of him.", "nay, but his jesting spirit, which is now crept into a lute string and now governed by stops", "indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him. conclude, conclude, he is in love.", "nay, but i know who loves him.", "that would i know too. i warrant, one that knows him not.", "yes, and his ill conditions, and, in despite of all, dies for him.", "she shall be buried with her face upwards."], ["yet is this no charm for the toothache. old signior, walk aside with me. i have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you, which these hobbyhorses must not hear.", "for my life, to break with him about beatrice!", "'tis even so. hero and margaret have by this played their parts with beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one another when they meet.", "my lord and brother, god save you.", "good e'en, brother.", "if your leisure served, i would speak with you.", "in private?", "if it please you. yet count claudio may hear, for what i would speak of concerns him.", "what's the matter?", "claudio means your lordship to be married tomorrow?", "you know he does.", "i know not that, when he knows what i know."], ["if there be any impediment, i pray you discover it.", "you may think i love you not. let that appear hereafter, and aim better at me by that i now will manifest. for my brother, i think he holds you well, and in dearness of heart hath holp to effect your ensuing marriage surely suit ill spent and labor ill bestowed.", "why, what's the matter?", "i came hither to tell you; and, circumstances shortened, for she has been too long a-talking of, the lady is disloyal.", "who, hero?", "even she: leonato's hero, your hero, every man's hero.", "disloyal?", "the word is too good to paint out her wickedness. i could say she were worse. think you of a worse title, and i will fit her to it. wonder not till further warrant. go but with me tonight, you shall see her chamber window entered, even the night before her wedding day. if you love her then, tomorrow wed her. but it would better fit your honor to change your mind.", "don pedro may this be so?", "i will not think it."], ["if you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you know. if you will follow me, i will show you enough, and when you have seen more and heard more, proceed accordingly.", "if i see anything tonight why i should not marry her, tomorrow in the congregation, where i should wed, there will i shame her.", "and as i wooed for thee to obtain her, i will join with thee to disgrace her.", "i will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses. bear it coldly but till midnight and let the issue show itself.", "o day untowardly turned!", "o mischief strangely thwarting!", "o plague right well prevented! so will you say when you have seen the sequel."], ["are you good men and true?", "yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation, body and soul.", "nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they should have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the prince's watch.", "well, give them their charge, neighbor dogberry.", "first, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?", "hugh otecake, sir, or george seacole, for they can write and read.", "come hither, neighbor seacole. god hath blessed you with a good name. to be a well-favored man is the gift of fortune, but to write and read comes by nature.", "both which, master constable", "you have. i knew it would be your answer. well, for your favor, sir, why, give god thanks, and make no boast of it, and for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no need of such vanity. you are thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch; therefore bear you the lantern. this is your charge:"], ["you shall comprehend all vagrom men; you are to bid any man stand, in the prince's name.", "how if he will not stand?", "why, then, take no note of him, but let him go and presently call the rest of the watch together and thank god you are rid of a knave.", "if he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the prince's subjects.", "true, and they are to meddle with none but the prince's subjects. you shall also make no noise in the streets; for, for the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable and not to be endured.", "we will rather sleep than talk. we know what belongs to a watch.", "why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for i cannot see how sleeping should offend. only have a care that your bills be not stolen. well, you are to call at all the alehouses and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.", "how if they will not?", "why, then, let them alone till they are sober. if they make you not then the better answer, you may say they are not the men you took them for.", "well, sir."], ["if you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your office, to be no true man, and for such kind of men, the less you meddle or make with them, why the more is for your honesty.", "if we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on him?", "truly, by your office you may, but i think they that touch pitch will be defiled. the most peaceable way for you, if you do take a thief, is to let him show himself what he is and steal out of your company.", "you have been always called a merciful man, partner.", "truly, i would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who hath any honesty in him.", "if you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the nurse and bid her still it.", "how if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?", "why then, depart in peace and let the child wake her with crying, for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baas will never answer a calf when he bleats.", "'tis very true.", "this is the end of the charge. you, constable, are to present the prince's own person. if you meet the prince in the night, you may stay him.", "nay, by 'r lady, that i think he cannot."], ["five shillings to one on 't, with any man that knows the statutes, he may stay him marry, not without the prince be willing, for indeed the watch ought to offend no man, and it is an offense to stay a man against his will.", "by 'r lady, i think it be so.", "ha, ha, ha! well, masters, good night. an there be any matter of weight chances, call up me. keep your fellows' counsels and your own; and good night. come, neighbor.", "well, masters, we hear our charge. let us go sit here upon the church bench till two, and then all to bed.", "one word more, honest neighbors. i pray you watch about signior leonato's door, for the wedding being there tomorrow, there is a great coil tonight. adieu, be vigitant, i beseech you.", "what conrade!", "peace! stir not.", "conrade, i say!", "here, man. i am at thy elbow."], ["mass, and my elbow itched, i thought there would a scab follow.", "i will owe thee an answer for that. and now forward with thy tale.", "stand thee close, then, under this penthouse, for it drizzles rain, and i will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.", "some treason, masters. yet stand close.", "therefore know i have earned of don john a thousand ducats.", "is it possible that any villainy should be so dear?", "thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villainy should be so rich. for when rich villains have need of poor ones, poor ones may make what price they will.", "i wonder at it.", "that shows thou art unconfirmed. thou knowest that the fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.", "yes, it is apparel.", "i mean the fashion.", "yes, the fashion is the fashion."], ["tush, i may as well say the fool's the fool. but seest thou not what a deformed thief this fashion is?", "i know that deformed. he has been a vile thief this seven year. he goes up and down like a gentleman. i remember his name.", "didst thou not hear somebody?", "no, 'twas the vane on the house.", "seest thou not, i say, what a deformed thief this fashion is, how giddily he turns about all the hot bloods between fourteen and five-and-thirty, sometimes fashioning them like pharaoh's soldiers in the reechy painting, sometime like god bel's priests in the old church-window, sometime like the shaven hercules in the smirched worm-eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as massy as his club?", "all this i see, and i see that the fashion wears out more apparel than the man. but art not thou thyself giddy with the fashion too, that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion?", "not so, neither. but know that i have tonight wooed margaret, the lady hero's gentlewoman, by the name of hero. she leans me out at her mistress' chamber window, bids me a thousand times good night. i tell this tale vilely. i should first tell thee how the prince, claudio and my master, planted and placed and possessed by my master don john, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable encounter."], ["and thought they margaret was hero?", "two of them did, the prince and claudio, but the devil my master knew she was margaret; and partly by his oaths, which first possessed them, partly by the dark night, which did deceive them, but chiefly by my villainy, which did confirm any slander that don john had made, away went claudio enraged, swore he would meet her as he was appointed next morning at the temple, and there, before the whole congregation, shame her with what he saw o'ernight and send her home again without a husband.", "we charge you, in the prince's name, stand!", "call up the right master constable. we have here recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known in the commonwealth.", "and one deformed is one of them. i know him; he wears a lock.", "masters, masters", "borachio you'll be made bring deformed forth, i warrant you.", "masters, never speak, we charge you, let us obey you go with us."], ["we are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken up of these men's bills.", "a commodity in question, i warrant you. come, we'll obey you."], ["good ursula, wake my cousin beatrice and desire her to rise.", "i will, lady.", "and bid her come hither.", "well.", "troth, i think your other rebato were better.", "no, pray thee, good meg, i'll wear this.", "by my troth, 's not so good, and i warrant your cousin will say so.", "my cousin's a fool, and thou art another. i'll wear none but this.", "i like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a thought browner; and your gown's a most rare fashion, i' faith. i saw the duchess of milan's gown that they praise so.", "oh, that exceeds, they say."], ["by my troth, 's but a nightgown in respect of yours cloth o' gold, and cuts, and laced with silver, set with pearls, down sleeves, side sleeves, and skirts, round underborne with a bluish tinsel. but for a fine, quaint, graceful, and excellent fashion, yours is worth ten on 't.", "god give me joy to wear it, for my heart is exceeding heavy.", "'twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.", "fie upon thee! art not ashamed?", "of what, lady? of speaking honorably? is not marriage honorable in a beggar? is not your lord honorable without marriage? i think you would have me say, \"saving your reverence, a husband.\" an bad thinking do not wrest true speaking, i'll offend nobody. is there any harm in \"the heavier for a husband\"? none, i think, an it be the right husband and the right wife. otherwise, 'tis light and not heavy. ask my lady beatrice else. here she comes.", "good morrow, coz.", "good morrow, sweet hero."], ["why, how now? do you speak in the sick tune?", "i am out of all other tune, methinks.", "clap 's into \"light o' love.\" that goes without a burden. do you sing it, and i'll dance it.", "ye light o' love, with your heels! then, if your husband have stables enough, you'll see he shall lack no barns.", "o illegitimate construction! i scorn that with my heels.", "'tis almost five o'clock, cousin. 'tis time you were ready. by my troth, i am exceeding ill. heigh-ho!", "for a hawk, a horse, or a husband?", "for the letter that begins them all, h.", "well, an you be not turned turk, there's no more sailing by the star.", "what means the fool, trow?", "nothing, i; but god send everyone their heart's desire.", "these gloves the count sent me, they are an excellent perfume."], ["i am stuffed, cousin. i cannot smell.", "a maid, and stuffed! there's goodly catching of cold.", "oh, god help me, god help me! how long have you professed apprehension?", "even since you left it. doth not my wit become me rarely?", "it is not seen enough; you should wear it in your cap. by my troth, i am sick.", "get you some of this distilled carduus benedictus and lay it to your heart. it is the only thing for a qualm.", "there thou prick'st her with a thistle.", "benedictus! why benedictus? you have some moral in this", "moral! no, by my troth, i have no moral meaning. i meant plain holy thistle. you may think perchance that i think you are in love. nay, by 'r lady, i am not such a fool to think what i list, nor i list not to think what i can, nor indeed i cannot think, if i would think my heart out of thinking, that you are in love or that you will be in love or that you can be in love. yet benedick was such another, and now is he become a man. he swore he would never marry, and yet now, in despite of his heart, he eats his meat without grudging. and how you may be converted i know not, but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do."], ["what pace is this that thy tongue keeps?", "not a false gallop.", "madam, withdraw: the prince, the count, signor benedick, don john, and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to church.", "help to dress me, good coz, good meg, good ursula."], ["what would you with me, honest neighbor?", "marry, sir, i would have some confidence with you that decerns you nearly.", "brief, i pray you, for you see it is a busy time with me.", "marry, this it is, sir.", "yes, in truth it is, sir.", "what is it, my good friends?", "goodman verges, sir, speaks a little off the matter. an old man, sir, and his wits are not so blunt as, god help, i would desire they were, but, in faith, honest as the skin between his brows.", "yes, i thank god i am as honest as any man living that is an old man and no honester than i.", "comparisons are odorous. , neighbor verges.", "neighbors, you are tedious.", "it pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor duke's officers. but truly, for mine own part, if i were as tedious as a king, i could find it in my heart to bestow it all of your worship."], ["all thy tediousness on me, ah?", "yea, an 'twere a thousand pound more than 'tis, for i hear as good exclamation on your worship as of any man in the city, and though i be but a poor man, i am glad to hear it.", "and so am i.", "i would fain know what you have to say.", "marry, sir, our watch tonight, excepting your worship's presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in messina.", "a good old man, sir. he will be talking. as they say, \"when the age is in, the wit is out.\" god help us, it is a world to see! well said, i' faith, neighbor verges. well, god's a good man. an two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind. an honest soul, i' faith, sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke bread, but god is to be worshipped, all men are not alike, alas, good neighbor!", "indeed, neighbor, he comes too short of you.", "gifts that god gives.", "i must leave you.", "one word, sir. our watch, sir, have indeed comprehended two aspicious persons, and we would have them this morning examined before your worship."], ["take their examination yourself and bring it me. i am now in great haste, as it may appear unto you.", "it shall be suffigance.", "drink some wine ere you go. fare you well.", "my lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband.", "i'll wait upon them. i am ready.", "go, good partner, go, get you to francis seacole. bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the jail. we are now to examination these men.", "and we must do it wisely.", "we will spare for no wit, i warrant you. here's that shall drive some of them to a noncome. only get the learned writer to set down our excommunication and meet me at the jail."], ["come, friar francis, be brief, only to the plain form of marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties afterwards.", "claudio you come hither, my lord, to marry this lady?", "no.", "to be married to her. friar, you come to marry her.", "lady, you come hither to be married to this count?", "i do.", "if either of you know any inward impediment why you should not be conjoined, charge you on your souls to utter it.", "know you any, hero?", "none, my lord.", "know you any, count?"], ["i dare make his answer, none.", "o, what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do, not knowing what they do!", "how now, interjections? why, then, some be of laughing, as, ah, ha, he!", "stand thee by, friar. father, by your leave, will you with free and unconstraind soul give me this maid, your daughter?", "as freely, son, as god did give her me.", "and what have i to give you back whose worth may counterpoise this rich and precious gift?", "nothing, unless you render her again.", "sweet prince, you learn me noble thankfulness. there, leonato, take her back again. give not this rotten orange to your friend. she's but the sign and semblance of her honor. behold how like a maid she blushes here! oh, what authority and show of truth can cunning sin cover itself withal! comes not that blood as modest evidence to witness simple virtue? would you not swear, all you that see her, that she were a maid by these exterior shows? but she is none. she knows the heat of a luxurious bed. her blush is guiltiness, not modesty."], ["what do you mean, my lord?", "not to be married, not to knit my soul to an approvd wanton.", "dear my lord, if you in your own proof have vanquished the resistance of her youth and made defeat of her virginity", "i know what you would say: if i have known her, you will say she did embrace me as a husband, and so extenuate the forehand sin. no, leonato, i never tempted her with word too large but, as a brother to his sister, showed bashful sincerity and comely love.", "and seemed i ever otherwise to you?", "out on thee, seeming! i will write against it. you seem to me as dian in her orb, as chaste as is the bud ere it be blown. but you are more intemperate in your blood than venus, or those pampered animals that rage in savage sensuality.", "is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide?", "sweet prince, why speak not you?", "what should i speak? i stand dishonored, that have gone about to link my dear friend to a common stale.", "are these things spoken, or do i but dream?"], ["sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.", "this looks not like a nuptial.", "true! o god!", "leonato, stand i here? is this the prince? is this the prince's brother? is this face hero's? are our eyes our own?", "all this is so, but what of this, my lord?", "let me but move one question to your daughter, and by that fatherly and kindly power that you have in her, bid her answer truly.", "i charge thee do so, as thou art my child.", "oh, god defend me! how am i beset! what kind of catechizing call you this?", "to make you answer truly to your name.", "is it not hero? who can blot that name with any just reproach?", "marry, that can hero! hero itself can blot out hero's virtue. what man was he talked with you yesternight out at your window betwixt twelve and one? now, if you are a maid, answer to this.", "i talked with no man at that hour, my lord."], ["why, then are you no maiden. leonato, i am sorry you must hear. upon mine honor, myself, my brother, and this grievd count did see her, hear her, at that hour last night talk with a ruffian at her chamber window who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain, confessed the vile encounters they have had a thousand times in secret.", "fie, fie, they are not to be named, my lord, not to be spoke of! there is not chastity enough in language, without offense, to utter them. thus, pretty lady, i am sorry for thy much misgovernment.", "o hero, what a hero hadst thou been if half thy outward graces had been placed about thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart! but fare thee well, most foul, most fair! farewell, thou pure impiety and impious purity. for thee i'll lock up all the gates of love, and on my eyelids shall conjecture hang, to turn all beauty into thoughts of harm, and never shall it more be gracious.", "hath no man's dagger here a point for me?", "why, how now, cousin! wherefore sink you down?", "come, let us go. these things, come thus to light, smother her spirits up."], ["how doth the lady?", "dead, i think. help, uncle! hero, why, hero! uncle! signor benedick! friar!", "o fate! take not away thy heavy hand! death is the fairest cover for her shame that may be wished for.", "how now, cousin hero!", "hero have comfort, lady.", "hero dost thou look up?", "yea, wherefore should she not?", "wherefore! why, doth not every earthly thing cry shame upon her? could she here deny the story that is printed in her blood? do not live, hero, do not ope thine eyes, for, did i think thou wouldst not quickly die, thought i thy spirits were stronger than thy shames, myself would, on the rearward of reproaches, strike at thy life. grieved i i had but one? chid i for that at frugal nature's frame? o, one too much by thee! why had i one? why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes? why had i not with charitable hand took up a beggar's issue at my gates, who, smirchd thus, and mired with infamy, i might have said, \"no part of it is mine; this shame derives itself from unknown loins\"?"], ["but mine, and mine i loved, and mine i praised, and mine that i was proud on, mine so much that i myself was to myself not mine, valuing of her why, she, o she is fall'n into a pit of ink, that the wide sea hath drops too few to wash her clean again and salt too little which may season give to her foul tainted flesh!", "sir, sir, be patient. for my part, i am so attired in wonder i know not what to say.", "oh, on my soul, my cousin is belied!", "lady, were you her bedfellow last night?", "no, truly not, although until last night i have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.", "confirmed, confirmed! oh, that is stronger made which was before barred up with ribs of iron! would the two princes lie and claudio lie, who loved her so that, speaking of her foulness, washed it with tears? hence from her. let her die.", "hear me a little, for i have only silent been so long, and given way unto this course of fortune, by noting of the lady. i have marked a thousand blushing apparitions to start into her face, a thousand innocent shames in angel whiteness beat away those blushes, and in her eye there hath appeared a fire to burn the errors that these princes hold against her maiden truth. call me a fool,"], ["trust not my reading nor my observations, which with experimental seal doth warrant the tenor of my book; trust not my age, my reverence, calling, nor divinity, if this sweet lady lie not guiltless here under some biting error.", "friar, it cannot be. thou seest that all the grace that she hath left is that she will not add to her damnation a sin of perjury. she not denies it. why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse that which appears in proper nakedness?", "lady, what man is he you are accused of?", "they know that do accuse me. i know none. if i know more of any man alive than that which maiden modesty doth warrant, let all my sins lack mercy! o my father, prove you that any man with me conversed at hours unmeet, or that i yesternight maintained the change of words with any creature, refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!", "there is some strange misprision in the princes.", "two of them have the very bent of honor, and if their wisdoms be misled in this, the practice of it lives in john the bastard, whose spirits toil in frame of villainies."], ["i know not. if they speak but truth of her, these hands shall tear her; if they wrong her honor, the proudest of them shall well hear of it. time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine nor age so eat up my invention nor fortune made such havoc of my means nor my bad life reft me so much of friends but they shall find, awaked in such a kind, both strength of limb and policy of mind, ability in means and choice of friends, to quit me of them throughly.", "pause awhile, and let my counsel sway you in this case. your daughter here the princes left for dead. let her awhile be secretly kept in and publish it that she is dead indeed. maintain a mourning ostentation, and on your family's old monument hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites that appertain unto a burial.", "what shall become of this? what will this do?", "marry, this, well carried, shall on her behalf change slander to remorse. that is some good. but not for that dream i on this strange course, but on this travail look for greater birth. she, dying, as it must so be maintained, upon the instant that she was accused, shall be lamented, pitied and excused of every hearer. for it so falls out that what we have we prize not to the worth whiles we enjoy it, but being lacked and lost, why then we rack the value, then we find"], ["the virtue that possession would not show us whiles it was ours. so will it fare with claudio. when he shall hear she died upon his words, the idea of her life shall sweetly creep into his study of imagination, and every lovely organ of her life shall come apparelled in more precious habit, more moving, delicate and full of life, into the eye and prospect of his soul than when she lived indeed. then shall he mourn, if ever love had interest in his liver, and wish he had not so accused her, no, though he thought his accusation true. let this be so, and doubt not but success will fashion the event in better shape than i can lay it down in likelihood. but if all aim but this be leveled false, the supposition of the lady's death will quench the wonder of her infamy. and if it sort not well, you may conceal her, as best befits her wounded reputation, in some reclusive and religious life, out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.", "signior leonato, let the friar advise you. and though you know my inwardness and love is very much unto the prince and claudio, yet, by mine honor, i will deal in this as secretly and justly as your soul should with your body.", "being that i flow in grief, the smallest twine may lead me."], ["'tis well consented. presently away, for to strange sores strangely they strain the cure. come, lady, die to live. this wedding day perhaps is but prolonged. have patience and endure.", "lady beatrice, have you wept all this while?", "yea, and i will weep a while longer.", "i will not desire that.", "you have no reason. i do it freely.", "surely i do believe your fair cousin is wronged.", "ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right her!", "is there any way to show such friendship?", "a very even way, but no such friend.", "may a man do it?", "it is a man's office, but not yours.", "i do love nothing in the world so well as you. is not that strange?", "as strange as the thing i know not. it were as possible for me to say i loved nothing so well as you, but believe me not, and yet i lie not, i confess nothing, nor i deny nothing. i am sorry for my cousin."], ["by my sword, beatrice, thou lovest me.", "do not swear, and eat it.", "i will swear by it that you love me, and i will make him eat it that says i love not you.", "will you not eat your word?", "with no sauce that can be devised to it. i protest i love thee.", "why then, god forgive me.", "what offense, sweet beatrice?", "you have stayed me in a happy hour. i was about to protest i loved you.", "and do it with all thy heart.", "i love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest.", "come, bid me do anything for thee.", "kill claudio.", "ha! not for the wide world.", "you kill me to deny it. farewell."], ["tarry, sweet beatrice.", "i am gone, though i am here. there is no love in you. nay, i pray you let me go.", "beatrice", "in faith, i will go.", "we'll be friends first.", "you dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy.", "is claudio thine enemy?", "is he not approved in the height a villain, that hath slandered, scorned, dishonored my kinswoman? oh, that i were a man! what, bear her in hand until they come to take hands and then, with public accusation, uncovered slander, unmitigated rancor o god, that i were a man! i would eat his heart in the marketplace.", "hear me, beatrice", "talk with a man out at a window! a proper saying!", "nay, but beatrice", "sweet hero, she is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.", "beat"], ["princes and counties! surely, a princely testimony, a goodly count, count comfect, a sweet gallant, surely! oh, that i were a man for his sake! or that i had any friend would be a man for my sake! but manhood is melted into curtsies, valor into compliment, and men are only turned into tongue, and trim ones too. he is now as valiant as hercules that only tells a lie and swears it. i cannot be a man with wishing, therefore i will die a woman with grieving.", "tarry, good beatrice. by this hand, i love thee.", "use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.", "think you in your soul the count claudio hath wronged hero?", "yea, as sure as i have a thought or a soul.", "enough, i am engaged. i will challenge him. i will kiss your hand, and so i leave you. by this hand, claudio shall render me a dear account. as you hear of me, so think of me. go comfort your cousin. i must say she is dead, and so, farewell."], ["is our whole dissembly appeared?", "oh, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.", "which be the malefactors?", "marry, that am i and my partner.", "nay, that's certain; we have the exhibition to examine.", "but which are the offenders that are to be examined? let them come before master constable.", "yea, marry, let them come before me. what is your name, friend?", "what's your name, friend?", "borachio.", "pray, write down, \"borachio.\" yours, sirrah?", "i am a gentleman, sir, and my name is conrade."], ["write down \"master gentleman conrade.\" masters, do you serve god?", "yea, sir, we hope.", "write down that they hope they serve god; and write god first, for god defend but god should go before such villains! masters, it is proved already that you are little better than false knaves, and it will go near to be thought so shortly. how answer you for yourselves?", "marry, sir, we say we are none.", "a marvelous witty fellow, i assure you, but i will go about with him. come you hither, sirrah, a word in your ear. sir, i say to you it is thought you are false knaves.", "sir, i say to you we are none.", "well, stand aside. 'fore god, they are both in a ale. have you writ down that they are none?", "master constable, you go not the way to examine. you must call forth the watch that are their accusers.", "yea, marry, that's the eftest way. let the watch come forth. masters, i charge you in the prince's name, accuse these men."], ["this man said, sir, that don john, the prince's brother, was a villain.", "write down prince john a villain. why, this is flat perjury, to call a prince's brother villain.", "master constable", "pray thee, fellow, peace. i do not like thy look, i promise thee.", "what heard you him say else?", "marry, that he had received a thousand ducats of don john for accusing the lady hero wrongfully.", "flat burglary as ever was committed.", "yea, by mass, that it is.", "what else, fellow?", "and that count claudio did mean upon his words to disgrace hero before the whole assembly, and not marry her.", "borachio o villain! thou wilt be condemned into everlasting redemption for this.", "what else?", "this is all."], ["and this is more, masters, than you can deny. prince john is this morning secretly stolen away. hero was in this manner accused, in this very manner refused, and upon the grief of this, suddenly died. master constable, let these men be bound and brought to leonato's. i will go before and show him their examination.", "come, let them be opinioned.", "let them be in the hands", "off, coxcomb!", "god's my life, where's the sexton? let him write down the prince's officer \"coxcomb.\" come, bind them. thou naughty varlet!", "away! you are an ass, you are an ass!", "dost thou not suspect my place? dost thou not suspect my years? oh, that he were here to write me down an ass! but masters, remember that i am an ass, though it be not written down, yet forget not that i am an ass. no, thou villain, thou art full of piety, as shall be proved upon thee by good witness. i am a wise fellow and, which is more, an officer and, which is more, a householder and, which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any is in messina, and one that knows the law, go to, and a rich fellow enough, go to, and a fellow that hath had losses, and one that hath two gowns and everything handsome about him. bring him away. oh, that i had been writ down an ass!"], ["if you go on thus, you will kill yourself, and 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief against yourself.", "i pray thee, cease thy counsel, which falls into mine ears as profitless as water in a sieve. give not me counsel, nor let no comforter delight mine ear but such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine. bring me a father that so loved his child, whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine, and bid him speak of patience. measure his woe the length and breadth of mine, and let it answer every strain for strain, as thus for thus and such a grief for such, in every lineament, branch, shape, and form. if such a one will smile and stroke his beard, bid sorrow wag, cry \"hem\" when he should groan, patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk with candle-wasters, bring him yet to me and i of him will gather patience. but there is no such man. for, brother, men can counsel and speak comfort to that grief which they themselves not feel, but, tasting it, their counsel turns to passion which before would give preceptial med'cine to rage, fetter strong madness in a silken thread, charm ache with air, and agony with words."], ["no, no, 'tis all men's office to speak patience to those that wring under the load of sorrow, but no man's virtue nor sufficiency to be so moral when he shall endure the like himself. therefore give me no counsel. my griefs cry louder than advertisement.", "therein do men from children nothing differ.", "i pray thee, peace. i will be flesh and blood, for there was never yet philosopher that could endure the toothache patiently, however they have writ the style of gods and made a push at chance and sufferance.", "yet bend not all the harm upon yourself. make those that do offend you suffer too.", "there thou speak'st reason. nay, i will do so. my soul doth tell me hero is belied, and that shall claudio know; so shall the prince and all of them that thus dishonor her.", "here comes the prince and claudio hastily.", "good e'en, good e'en.", "good day to both of you.", "hear you, my lords", "we have some haste, leonato."], ["some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord. are you so hasty now? well, all is one.", "nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.", "if he could right himself with quarreling, some of us would lie low.", "who wrongs him?", "marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou. nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword. i fear thee not.", "marry, beshrew my hand if it should give your age such cause of fear. in faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.", "tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me. i speak not like a dotard nor a fool, as under privilege of age to brag what i have done being young, or what would do were i not old. know, claudio, to thy head, thou hast so wronged mine innocent child and me that i am forced to lay my reverence by, and with gray hairs and bruise of many days do challenge thee to trial of a man. i say thou hast belied mine innocent child. thy slander hath gone through and through her heart, and she lies buried with her ancestors, oh, in a tomb where never scandal slept save this of hers, framed by thy villainy.", "my villainy?"], ["thine, claudio, thine, i say.", "you say not right, old man.", "my lord, my lord, i'll prove it on his body if he dare, despite his nice fence and his active practice, his may of youth and bloom of lustihood.", "away! i will not have to do with you.", "canst thou so daff me? thou hast killed my child. if thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.", "he shall kill two of us, and men indeed, but that's no matter. let him kill one first. win me and wear me! let him answer me. come, follow me, boy. come, sir boy, come, follow me. sir boy, i'll whip you from your foining fence, nay, as i am a gentleman, i will.", "brother", "content yourself. god knows i loved my niece, and she is dead, slandered to death by villains that dare as well answer a man indeed as i dare take a serpent by the tongue. boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!", "brother anthony"], ["hold you content. what, man! i know them, yea, and what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple scrambling, outfacing, fashion-monging boys, that lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander, go anticly and show outward hideousness, and speak off half a dozen dang'rous words how they might hurt their enemies, if they durst, and this is all.", "but brother anthony", "come, 'tis no matter. do not you meddle. let me deal in this.", "gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience. my heart is sorry for your daughter's death, but, on my honor, she was charged with nothing but what was true and very full of proof.", "my lord, my lord", "i will not hear you.", "no? come, brother; away! i will be heard.", "and shall, or some of us will smart for it.", "see, see, here comes the man we went to seek.", "now, signior, what news?"], ["don pedro good day, my lord.", "welcome, signior. you are almost come to part almost a fray.", "we had like to have had our two noses snapped off with two old men without teeth.", "leonato and his brother. what think'st thou? had we fought, i doubt we should have been too young for them.", "in a false quarrel there is no true valor. i came to seek you both.", "we have been up and down to seek thee, for we are high- proof melancholy and would fain have it beaten away. wilt thou use thy wit?", "it is in my scabbard. shall i draw it?", "dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?", "never any did so, though very many have been beside their wit. i will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrels: draw to pleasure us.", "as i am an honest man, he looks pale. art thou sick, or angry?", "benedick what, courage, man! what though care killed a cat? thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care."], ["sir, i shall meet your wit in the career, an you charge it against me. i pray you, choose another subject.", "don pedro nay, then, give him another staff. this last was broke 'cross.", "by this light, he changes more and more. i think he be angry indeed.", "if he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.", "shall i speak a word in your ear?", "god bless me from a challenge!", "claudio you are a villain. i jest not. i will make it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare. do me right, or i will protest your cowardice. you have killed a sweet lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. let me hear from you.", "well, i will meet you, so i may have good cheer.", "what, a feast, a feast?", "i' faith, i thank him. he hath bid me to a calf's head and a capon, the which if i do not carve most curiously, say my knife's naught. shall i not find a woodcock too?", "sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily."], ["i'll tell thee how beatrice praised thy wit he other day. i said thou hadst a fine wit. \"true,\" said she, \"a fine little one.\" \"no,\" said i, \"a great wit.\" \"right,\" says she, \"a great gross one.\" \"nay,\" said i, \"a good wit.\" \"just,\" said she, \"it hurts nobody.\" \"nay,\" said i, \"the gentleman is wise.\" \"certain,\" said she, \"a wise gentleman.\" \"nay,\" said i, \"he hath the tongues.\" \"that i believe,\" said she, \"for he swore a thing to me on monday night, which he forswore on tuesday morning; there's a double tongue, there's two tongues.\" thus did she an hour together transshape thy particular virtues. yet at last she concluded with a sigh, thou wast the proper'st man in italy.", "for the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.", "yea, that she did. but yet for all that, an if she did not hate him deadly, she would love him dearly. the old man's daughter told us all.", "all, all. and, moreover, god saw him when he was hid in the garden.", "but when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the sensible benedick's head?", "yea, and text underneath: \"here dwells benedick the married man\"?", "fare you well, boy. you know my mind. i will leave you now to your gossip-like humor. you break jests as braggarts do their blades, which, god be thanked, hurt not. my lord, for your many courtesies i thank you. i must discontinue your company."], ["your brother the bastard is fled from messina. you have among you killed a sweet and innocent lady. for my lord lackbeard there, he and i shall meet, and till then peace be with him.", "he is in earnest.", "in most profound earnest, and, i'll warrant you, for the love of beatrice.", "and hath challenged thee?", "most sincerely.", "what a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and hose and leaves off his wit!", "he is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to such a man.", "but soft you, let me be. pluck up, my heart, and be sad. did he not say my brother was fled?", "come you, sir. if justice cannot tame you, she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance. nay, an you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must be looked to.", "how now? two of my brother's men bound! borachio one!"], ["hearken after their offense, my lord.", "officers, what offense have these men done?", "marry, sir, they have committed false report; moreover, they have spoken untruths; secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and lastly, they have belied a lady; thirdly, they have verified unjust things; and, to conclude, they are lying knaves.", "first, i ask thee what they have done; thirdly, i ask thee what's their offense; sixth and lastly, why they are committed; and, to conclude, what you lay to their charge.", "rightly reasoned, and in his own division; and, by my troth, there's one meaning well suited.", "borachio conrade who have you offended, masters, that you are thus bound to your answer? this learned constable is too cunning to be understood. what's your offense?", "sweet prince, let me go no farther to mine answer. do you hear me, and let this count kill me. i have deceived even your very eyes. what your wisdoms could not discover, these shallow fools have brought to light, who in the night overheard me confessing to this man how don john your brother incensed me to slander the lady hero, how you were brought into the orchard and saw me court margaret in hero's garments, how you disgraced her when you should marry her. my villainy they have upon record, which i had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my shame. the lady is dead upon mine and my master's false accusation. and, briefly, i desire nothing but the reward of a villain."], ["claudio runs not this speech like iron through your blood?", "i have drunk poison whiles he uttered it.", "borachio but did my brother set thee on to this?", "yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.", "he is composed and framed of treachery, and fled he is upon this villainy.", "sweet hero, now thy image doth appear in the rare semblance that i loved it first.", "come, bring away the plaintiffs. by this time our sexton hath reformed signior leonato of the matter. and, masters, do not forget to specify, when time and place shall serve, that i am an ass.", "here, here comes master signior leonato, and the sexton too.", "which is the villain? let me see his eyes, that, when i note another man like him, i may avoid him. which of these is he?", "if you would know your wronger, look on me.", "art thou the slave that with thy breath hast killed mine innocent child?"], ["yea, even i alone.", "no, not so, villain, thou beliest thyself. here stand a pair of honorable men a third is fled that had a hand in it. i thank you, princes, for my daughter's death. record it with your high and worthy deeds. 'twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.", "i know not how to pray your patience, yet i must speak. choose your revenge yourself. impose me to what penance your invention can lay upon my sin. yet sinned i not but in mistaking.", "by my soul, nor i, and yet to satisfy this good old man i would bend under any heavy weight that he'll enjoin me to.", "i cannot bid you bid my daughter live that were impossible but, i pray you both, possess the people in messina here how innocent she died. and if your love can labor ought in sad invention, hang her an epitaph upon her tomb and sing it to her bones. sing it tonight. tomorrow morning come you to my house, and since you could not be my son-in-law, be yet my nephew. my brother hath a daughter, almost the copy of my child that's dead, and she alone is heir to both of us. give her the right you should have given her cousin, and so dies my revenge."], ["o noble sir! your overkindness doth wring tears from me. i do embrace your offer; and dispose for henceforth of poor claudio.", "tomorrow then i will expect your coming. tonight i take my leave. this naughty man shall face to face be brought to margaret, who i believe was packed in all this wrong, hired to it by your brother.", "no, by my soul, she was not, nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me, but always hath been just and virtuous in any thing that i do know by her.", "leonato moreover, sir, which indeed is not under white and black, this plaintiff here, the offender, did call me ass. i beseech you, let it be remembered in his punishment. and also the watch heard them talk of one deformed. they say he wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it and borrows money in god's name, the which he hath used so long and never paid that now men grow hard-hearted and will lend nothing for god's sake. pray you, examine him upon that point.", "i thank thee for thy care and honest pains.", "your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverent youth, and i praise god for you.", "there's for thy pains."], ["god save the foundation!", "go, i discharge thee of thy prisoner, and i thank thee.", "i leave an arrant knave with your worship, which i beseech your worship to correct yourself, for the example of others. god keep your worship! i wish your worship well. god restore you to health! i humbly give you leave to depart, and if a merry meeting may be wished, god prohibit it! come, neighbor.", "until tomorrow morning, lords, farewell.", "farewell, my lords. we look for you tomorrow.", "we will not fail.", "tonight i'll mourn with hero.", "bring you these fellows on. we'll talk with margaret, how her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow."], ["pray thee, sweet mistress margaret, deserve well at my hands by helping me to the speech of beatrice.", "will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?", "in so high a style, margaret, that no man living shall come over it, for in most comely truth thou deservest it.", "to have no man come over me! why, shall i always keep below stairs?", "thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth; it catches.", "and yours as blunt as the fencer's foils, which hit but hurt not.", "a most manly wit, margaret, it will not hurt a woman. and so, i pray thee, call beatrice. i give thee the bucklers.", "give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.", "if you use them, margaret, you must put in the pikes with a vice, and they are dangerous weapons for maids.", "well, i will call beatrice to you, who i think hath legs."], ["and therefore will come.", ", , , i mean in singing. but in loving, leander the good swimmer, troilus the first employer of panders, and a whole bookful of these quondam carpetmongers, whose names yet run smoothly in the even road of a blank verse, why, they were never so truly turned over and over as my poor self in love. marry, i cannot show it in rhyme. i have tried. i can find out no rhyme to \"lady\" but \"baby\" an innocent rhyme; for \"scorn,\" \"horn\" a hard rhyme; for, \"school,\" \"fool\" a babbling rhyme; very ominous endings. no, i was not born under a rhyming planet, nor i cannot woo in festival terms.", "sweet beatrice, wouldst thou come when i called thee?", "yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.", "oh , stay but till then!", "\"then\" is spoken. fare you well now. and yet, ere i go, let me go with that i came, which is, with knowing what hath passed between you and claudio.", "only foul words, and thereupon i will kiss thee."], ["foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul breath, and foul breath is noisome. therefore i will depart unkissed.", "thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense, so forcible is thy wit. but i must tell thee plainly, claudio undergoes my challenge, and either i must shortly hear from him, or i will subscribe him a coward. and i pray thee now tell me, for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me?", "for them all together, which maintained so politic a state of evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them. but for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me?", "suffer love! a good epithet! i do suffer love indeed, for i love thee against my will.", "in spite of your heart, i think. alas, poor heart, if you spite it for my sake, i will spite it for yours, for i will never love that which my riend hates.", "thou and i are too wise to woo peaceably.", "it appears not in this confession. there's not one wise man among twenty that will praise himself.", "an old, an old instance, beatrice, that lived in the lime of good neighbors. if a man do not erect in this age his own tomb ere he dies, he shall live no longer in monument than the bell rings and the widow weeps.", "and how long is that, think you?"], ["question: why, an hour in clamor and a quarter in rheum. therefore is it most expedient for the wise, if don worm, his conscience, find no impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet of his own virtues, as i am to myself. so much for praising myself, who, i myself will bear witness, is praiseworthy. an now tell me, how doth your cousin?", "very ill.", "and how do you?", "very ill, too.", "serve god, love me, and mend. there will i leave you too, for here comes one in haste.", "madam, you must come to your uncle. yonder's old coil at home. it is proved my lady hero hath been falsely accused, the prince and claudio mightily abused, and don john is the author of all, who is fled and gone. will you come presently?", "will you go hear this news, signior?", "i will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried in thy eyes and moreover, i will go with thee to thy uncle's."], ["is this the monument of leonato?", "it is, my lord.", "done to death by slanderous tongues was the hero that here lies. death, in guerdon of her wrongs, gives her fame which never dies. so the life that died with shame lives in death with glorious fame.", "hang thou there upon the tomb, praising her when i am dumb. now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn. , , . . . , , ."], ["now, unto thy bones good night! yearly will i do this rite.", "good morrow, masters. put your torches out. the wolves have preyed, and look, the gentle day, before the wheels of phoebus, round about dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey. thanks to you all, and leave us. fare you well.", "good morrow, masters. each his several way.", "come, let us hence, and put on other weeds, and then to leonato's we will go.", "and hymen now with luckier issue speed 's than this for whom we rendered up this woe."], ["did i not tell you she was innocent?", "so are the prince and claudio, who accused her upon the error that you heard debated. but margaret was in some fault for this, although against her will, as it appears in the true course of all the question.", "well, i am glad that all things sort so well.", "and so am i, being else by faith enforced to call young claudio to a reckoning for it.", "well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all, withdraw into a chamber by yourselves, and when i send for you, come hither masked. the prince and claudio promised by this hour to visit me. you know your office, brother. you must be father to your brother's daughter, and give her to young claudio.", "which i will do with confirmed countenance.", "friar, i must entreat your pains, i think.", "to do what, signior?"], ["to bind me or undo me, one of them. signior leonato, truth it is, good signior, your niece regards me with an eye of favor.", "that eye my daughter lent her; 'tis most true.", "and i do with an eye of love requite her.", "the sight whereof i think you had from me, from claudio and the prince. but what's your will?", "your answer, sir, is enigmatical. but for my will, my will is your goodwill may stand with ours, this day to be conjoined in the state of honorable marriage in which, good friar, i shall desire your help.", "my heart is with your liking.", "and my help. here comes the prince and claudio.", "good morrow to this fair assembly.", "good morrow, prince; good morrow, claudio. we here attend you. are you yet determined today to marry with my brother's daughter?", "i'll hold my mind were she an ethiope."], ["call her forth, brother. here's the friar ready.", "good morrow, benedick. why, what's the matter that you have such a february face, so full of frost, of storm and cloudiness?", "i think he thinks upon the savage bull. tush, fear not, man. we'll tip thy horns with gold, and all europa shall rejoice at thee as once europa did at lusty jove when he would play the noble beast in love.", "bull jove, sir, had an amiable low, and some such strange bull leapt your father's cow and got a calf in that same noble feat much like to you, for you have just his bleat.", "for this i owe you. here comes other reck'nings.", "which is the lady i must seize upon?", "this same is she, and i do give you her.", "why, then she's mine. sweet, let me see your face.", "no, that you shall not till you take her hand before this friar and swear to marry her."], ["hero give me your hand before this holy friar. i am your husband, if you like of me.", "and when i lived, i was your other wife, and when you loved, you were my other husband.", "another hero!", "nothing certainer. one hero died defiled, but i do live, and surely as i live, i am a maid.", "the former hero! hero that is dead!", "she died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.", "all this amazement can i qualify when after that the holy rites are ended i'll tell you largely of fair hero's death. meantime let wonder seem familiar, and to the chapel let us presently.", "soft and fair, friar. which is beatrice?", "i answer to that name. what is your will?", "do not you love me?", "why no, no more than reason.", "why then, your uncle and the prince and claudio have been deceived. they swore you did.", "do not you love me?"], ["troth, no, no more than reason.", "why then, my cousin, margaret, and ursula are much deceived, for they did swear you did.", "they swore that you were almost sick for me.", "they swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.", "'tis no such matter. then you do not love me?", "no, truly, but in friendly recompense.", "come, cousin, i am sure you love the gentleman.", "and i'll be sworn upon 't that he loves her, for here's a paper written in his hand, a halting sonnet of his own pure brain, fashioned to beatrice.", "and here's another, writ in my cousin's hand, stol'n from her pocket, containing her affection unto benedick.", "a miracle! here's our own hands against our hearts. come, i will have thee, but, by this light, i take thee for pity.", "i would not deny you, but, by this good day, i yield upon great persuasion, and partly to save your life, for i was told you were in a consumption.", "peace! i will stop your mouth."], ["how dost thou, benedick, the married man?", "i'll tell thee what, prince: a college of wit-crackers cannot flout me out of my humor. dost thou think i care for a satire or an epigram? no. if a man will be beaten with brains, he shall wear nothing handsome about him. in brief, since i do purpose to marry, i will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say against it, and therefore never flout at me for what i have said against it. for man is a giddy thing, and this is my conclusion. for thy part, claudio, i did think to have beaten thee, but in that thou art like to be my kinsman, live unbruised, and love my cousin.", "i had well hoped thou wouldst have denied beatrice, that i might have cudgeled thee out of thy single life, to make thee a double-dealer, which out of question, thou wilt be, if my cousin do not look exceedingly narrowly to thee.", "come, come, we are friends. let's have a dance ere we are married, that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels.", "we'll have dancing afterward.", "first, of my word! therefore play, music. prince, thou art sad. get thee a wife, get thee a wife. there is no staff more reverend than one tipped with horn."], ["don pedro my lord, your brother john is ta'en in flight and brought with armed men back to messina.", "don pedro think not on him till tomorrow. i'll devise thee brave punishments for him. strike up, pipers."]], [["tush! never tell me. i take it much unkindly that thou, iago, who hast had my purse as if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.", "'sblood, but you'll not hear me! if ever i did dream of such a matter, abhor me.", "thou told'st me thou didst hold him in thy hate.", "despise me if i do not. three great ones of the city (in personal suit to make me his lieutenant) off-capped to him, and by the faith of man i know my price, i am worth no worse a place. but he (as loving his own pride and purposes) evades them with a bombast circumstance horribly stuffed with epithets of war, and in conclusion nonsuits my mediators. for \"certes,\" says he, \"i have already chose my officer.\" and what was he? forsooth, a great arithmetician, one michael cassio, a florentine (a fellow almost damned in a fair wife) that never set a squadron in the field, nor the division of a battle knows more than a spinster unless the bookish theoric,"], ["wherein the toged consuls can propose as masterly as he. mere prattle without practice is all his soldiership. but he, sir, had th' election and i, of whom his eyes had seen the proof at rhodes, at cyprus, and on other grounds christian and heathen, must be belee'd and calmed by debitor and creditor. this counter-caster he (in good time) must his lieutenant be and i, bless the mark, his moorship's ancient.", "by heaven, i rather would have been his hangman.", "why, there's no remedy. 'tis the curse of service. preferment goes by letter and affection, and not by old gradation, where each second stood heir to th' first. now sir, be judge yourself, whether i in any just term am affined to love the moor.", "i would not follow him then.", "o sir, content you. i follow him to serve my turn upon him. we cannot all be masters, nor all masters cannot be truly followed. you shall mark many a duteous and knee-crooking knave that (doting on his own obsequious bondage) wears out his time much like his master's ass for naught but provender, and when he's old, cashiered. whip me such honest knaves. others there are who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty, keep yet their hearts attending on themselves and, throwing but shows of service on their lords, do well thrive by them. and when they have lined their coats, do themselves homage. these fellows have some soul,"], ["and such a one do i profess myself. for, sir, it is as sure as you are roderigo, were i the moor, i would not be iago. in following him, i follow but myself. heaven is my judge, not i for love and duty, but seeming so, for my peculiar end. for when my outward action doth demonstrate the native act and figure of my heart in compliment extern, 'tis not long after but i will wear my heart upon my sleeve for daws to peck at. i am not what i am.", "what a full fortune does the thick-lips owe if he can carry't thus!", "call up her father. rouse him. make after him, poison his delight, proclaim him in the streets. incense her kinsmen, and, though he in a fertile climate dwell, plague him with flies. though that his joy be joy yet throw such changes of vexation on't, as it may lose some color.", "here is her father's house, i'll call aloud.", "do, with like timorous accent and dire yell as when, by night and negligence, the fire is spied in populous cities.", "what, ho, brabantio! signior brabantio, ho!", "awake! what, ho, brabantio! thieves! thieves! look to your house, your daughter, and your bags! thieves! thieves!"], ["what is the reason of this terrible summons? what is the matter there?", "signior, is all your family within?", "are your doors locked?", "why, wherefore ask you this?", "zounds, sir, you're robbed! for shame, put on your gown. your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul. even now, now, very now, an old black ram is tupping your white ewe. arise, arise, awake the snorting citizens with the bell or else the devil will make a grandsire of you. arise, i say!", "what, have you lost your wits?", "most reverend signior, do you know my voice?", "not i. what are you?", "my name is roderigo.", "the worser welcome. i have charged thee not to haunt about my doors. in honest plainness thou hast heard me say my daughter is not for thee. and now in madness, being full of supper and distempering drafts, upon malicious knavery dost thou come to start my quiet?", "sir, sir, sir"], ["but thou must needs be sure my spirits and my place have in their power to make this bitter to thee.", "patience, good sir.", "what tell'st thou me of robbing? this is venice, my house is not a grange.", "most grave brabantio, in simple and pure soul i come to you", "zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve god, if the devil bid you. because we come to do you service and you think we are ruffians, you'll have your daughter covered with a barbary horse. you'll have your nephews neigh to you. you'll have coursers for cousins and gennets for germans.", "what profane wretch art thou?", "i am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the moor are now making the beast with two backs.", "thou art a villain!", "you are a senator!", "this thou shalt answer. i know thee, roderigo.", "sir, i will answer any thing. but, i beseech you, if't be your pleasure and most wise consent (as partly i find it is) that your fair daughter at this odd-even and dull watch o' th' night"], ["transported with no worse nor better guard but with a knave of common hire, a gondolier, to the gross clasps of a lascivious moor, if this be known to you and your allowance, we then have done you bold and saucy wrongs. but if you know not this my manners tell me we have your wrong rebuke. do not believe that, from the sense of all civility, i thus would play and trifle with your reverence. your daughter (if you have not given her leave) i say again, hath made a gross revolt, tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes in an extravagant and wheeling stranger of here and everywhere. straight satisfy yourself. if she be in her chamber or your house, let loose on me the justice of the state for thus deluding you.", "strike on the tinder, ho! give me a taper, call up all my people! this accident is not unlike my dream, belief of it oppresses me already. light, i say, light!", "( roderigo farewell, for i must leave you. it seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place, to be producted (as, if i stay, i shall) against the moor. for i do know the state (however this may gall him with some check) cannot with safety cast him, for he's embarked with such loud reason to the cyprus wars (which even now stand in act) that, for their souls, another of his fathom they have none to lead their business. in which regard,"], ["though i do hate him as i do hell pains, yet for necessity of present life i must show out a flag and sign of love, (which is indeed but sign). that you shall surely find him, lead to the sagittary the raisd search, and there will i be with him. so farewell.", "it is too true an evil. gone she is. and what's to come of my despisd time is naught but bitterness. now, roderigo, where didst thou see her? oh, unhappy girl! with the moor, say'st thou? who would be a father? how didst thou know 'twas she? oh, she deceives me past thought! what said she to you? get more tapers, raise all my kindred. are they married, think you?", "truly, i think they are.", "oh, heaven, how got she out? oh, treason of the blood! fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds by what you see them act. is there not charms by which the property of youth and maidhood may be abused? have you not read, roderigo, of some such thing?", "yes, sir, i have indeed.", "call up my brother oh, would you had had her! some one way, some another. do you know where we may apprehend her and the moor?", "i think i can discover him, if you please to get good guard and go along with me."], ["pray you lead on. at every house i'll call. i may command at most. get weapons, ho! and raise some special officers of might. on, good roderigo. i will deserve your pains."], ["though in the trade of war i have slain men, yet do i hold it very stuff o' th' conscience to do no contrived murder. i lack iniquity sometimes to do me service. nine or ten times i had thought t' have yerked him here under the ribs.", "'tis better as it is.", "nay, but he prated and spoke such scurvy and provoking terms against your honor that, with the little godliness i have, i did full hard forbear him. but i pray you, sir, are you fast married? be assured of this: that the magnifico is much beloved and hath in his effect a voice potential as double as the duke's. he will divorce you, or put upon you what restraint and grievance the law (with all his might to enforce it on) will give him cable.", "let him do his spite. my services which i have done the signiory shall out-tongue his complaints. 'tis yet to know which, when i know that boasting is an honor, i shall promulgate. i fetch my life and being from men of royal siege, and my demerits may speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune as this that i have reached. for know, iago, but that i love the gentle desdemona, i would not my unhousd free condition put into circumscription and confine for the sea's worth. but look, what lights come yond?"], ["those are the raisd father and his friends. you were best go in.", "not i, i must be found. my parts, my title, and my perfect soul shall manifest me rightly. is it they?", "by janus, i think no.", "the servants of the duke and my lieutenant? the goodness of the night upon you, friends! what is the news?", "the duke does greet you, general, and he requires your haste-post-haste appearance, even on the instant.", "what's the matter, think you?", "something from cyprus as i may divine. it is a business of some heat. the galleys have sent a dozen sequent messengers this very night at one another's heels, and many of the consuls, raised and met, are at the duke's already. you have been hotly called for. when being not at your lodging to be found the senate hath sent about three several guests to search you out.", "'tis well i am found by you. i will but spend a word here in the house and go with you."], ["ancient, what makes he here?", "faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack. if it prove lawful prize, he's made for ever.", "i do not understand.", "he's married.", "to who?", "marry, to", "come, captain, will you go?", "have with you.", "here comes another troop to seek for you.", "it is brabantio. general, be advised, he comes to bad intent.", "holla! stand there!", "signior, it is the moor.", "down with him, thief!"], ["you, roderigo! come, sir, i am for you.", "keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them. good signior, you shall more command with years than with your weapons.", "o thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my daughter? damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her! for i'll refer me to all things of sense, if she in chains of magic were not bound, whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy, so opposite to marriage that she shunned the wealthy curld darlings of our nation, would ever have, t' incur a general mock, run from her guardage to the sooty bosom of such a thing as thou to fear, not to delight. judge me the world if 'tis not gross in sense that thou hast practiced on her with foul charms, abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals that weakens motion. i'll have 't disputed on. 'tis probable and palpable to thinking. i therefore apprehend and do attach thee for an abuser of the world, a practicer of arts inhibited and out of warrant. lay hold upon him. if he do resist, subdue him at his peril!", "hold your hands, both you of my inclining and the rest. were it my cue to fight, i should have known it without a prompter. whither will you that i go to answer this your charge?"], ["to prison, till fit time of law and course of direct session call thee to answer.", "what if i do obey? how may the duke be therewith satisfied, whose messengers are here about my side upon some present business of the state to bring me to him?", "'tis true, most worthy signior. the duke's in council and your noble self, i am sure, is sent for.", "how? the duke in council? in this time of the night? bring him away. mine's not an idle cause. the duke himself, or any of my brothers of the state, cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own. for if such actions may have passage free, bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be."], ["there's no composition in this news that gives them credit.", "indeed, they are disproportioned. my letters say a hundred and seven galleys.", "and mine a hundred and forty.", "and mine, two hundred. but though they jump not on a just account as in these cases, where the aim reports 'tis oft with difference yet do they all confirm a turkish fleet, and bearing up to cyprus.", "nay, it is possible enough to judgment. i do not so secure me in the error, but the main article i do approve in fearful sense.", "what, ho, what, ho, what, ho!", "a messenger from the galleys.", "now, what's the business?", "the turkish preparation makes for rhodes, so was i bid report here to the state by signior angelo."], ["how say you by this change?", "this cannot be, by no assay of reason. 'tis a pageant, to keep us in false gaze. when we consider th' importancy of cyprus to the turk, and let ourselves again but understand that as it more concerns the turk than rhodes so may he with more facile question bear it, for that it stands not in such warlike brace but altogether lacks th' abilities that rhodes is dressed in. if we make thought of this we must not think the turk is so unskillful to leave that latest which concerns him first, neglecting an attempt of ease and gain to wake and wage a danger profitless.", "nay, in all confidence, he's not for rhodes.", "here is more news.", "the ottomites, reverend and gracious, steering with due course toward the isle of rhodes, have there injointed them with an after fleet.", "ay, so i thought. how many, as you guess?", "of thirty sail. and now they do re-stem their backward course, bearing with frank appearance their purposes toward cyprus. signior montano, your trusty and most valiant servitor, with his free duty recommends you thus, and prays you to believe him."], ["'tis certain then for cyprus. marcus luccicos, is not he in town?", "he's now in florence.", "write from us to him. post-post-haste, dispatch.", "here comes brabantio and the valiant moor.", "valiant othello, we must straight employ you against the general enemy ottoman brabantio i did not see you. welcome, gentle signior. we lacked your counsel and your help tonight.", "so did i yours. good your grace, pardon me. neither my place nor aught i heard of business hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care take hold on me, for my particular grief is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature that it engluts and swallows other sorrows and it is still itself.", "why, what's the matter?", "my daughter! oh, my daughter!", "dead?", "ay, to me. she is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted by spells and medicines bought of mountebanks."], ["for nature so prepost'rously to err, being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense, sans witchcraft could not.", "whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself and you of her, the bloody book of law you shall yourself read in the bitter letter, after your own sense, yea, though our proper son stood in your action.", "humbly i thank your grace. here is the man, this moor, whom now it seems, your special mandate for the state affairs hath hither brought.", "we are very sorry for't.", "othello what, in your own part, can you say to this?", "nothing, but this is so.", "most potent, grave, and reverend signiors, my very noble and approved good masters, that i have ta'en away this old man's daughter, it is most true. true, i have married her. the very head and front of my offending hath this extent, no more. rude am i in my speech, and little blessed with the soft phrase of peace, for since these arms of mine had seven years' pith till now some nine moons wasted, they have used their dearest action in the tented field, and little of this great world can i speak,"], ["more than pertains to feats of broils and battle, and therefore little shall i grace my cause in speaking for myself. yet, by your gracious patience, i will a round unvarnished tale deliver of my whole course of love. what drugs, what charms, what conjuration and what mighty magic for such proceeding i am charged withal i won his daughter.", "a maiden never bold, of spirit so still and quiet that her motion blushed at herself. and she, in spite of nature, of years, of country, credit, everything, to fall in love with what she feared to look on? it is a judgment maimed and most imperfect that will confess perfection so could err. against all rules of nature, and must be driven to find out practices of cunning hell why this should be. i therefore vouch again that with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood or with some dram, conjured to this effect, he wrought upon her.", "to vouch this is no proof, without more wider and more overt test than these thin habits and poor likelihoods of modern seeming do prefer against him.", "but, othello, speak. did you by indirect and forcd courses subdue and poison this young maid's affections? or came it by request and such fair question as soul to soul affordeth?", "i do beseech you, send for the lady to the sagittary,"], ["and let her speak of me before her father. if you do find me foul in her report the trust, the office i do hold of you, not only take away, but let your sentence even fall upon my life.", "fetch desdemona hither.", "ancient, conduct them. you best know the place.", "and till she come, as truly as to heaven i do confess the vices of my blood so justly to your grave ears i'll present how i did thrive in this fair lady's love and she in mine.", "say it, othello.", "her father loved me, oft invited me, still questioned me the story of my life from year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes, that i have passed. i ran it through, even from my boyish days, to th' very moment that he bade me tell it, wherein i spoke of most disastrous chances, of moving accidents by flood and field, of hair-breadth 'scapes i' th' imminent deadly breach, of being taken by the insolent foe and sold to slavery, of my redemption thence and portance in my traveler's history. wherein of antres vast and deserts idle, rough quarries, rocks, hills whose heads touch heaven it was my hint to speak such was my process and of the cannibals that each others eat,"], ["the anthropophagi, and men whose heads grew beneath their shoulders. these things to hear would desdemona seriously incline. but still the house affairs would draw her hence, which ever as she could with haste dispatch, she'd come again, and with a greedy ear devour up my discourse, which i, observing, took once a pliant hour and found good means to draw from her a prayer of earnest heart that i would all my pilgrimage dilate, whereof by parcels she had something heard but not intentively. i did consent, and often did beguile her of her tears when i did speak of some distressful stroke that my youth suffered. my story being done she gave me for my pains a world of sighs. she swore, in faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange, 'twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful. she wished she had not heard it, yet she wished that heaven had made her such a man. she thanked me and bade me, if i had a friend that loved her, i should but teach him how to tell my story and that would woo her. upon this hint i spake. she loved me for the dangers i had passed, and i loved her that she did pity them. this only is the witchcraft i have used. here comes the lady. let her witness it.", "i think this tale would win my daughter too. good brabantio. take up this mangled matter at the best. men do their broken weapons rather use than their bare hands."], ["i pray you, hear her speak. if she confess that she was half the wooer, destruction on my head if my bad blame light on the man. come hither, gentle mistress. do you perceive in all this noble company where most you owe obedience?", "my noble father, i do perceive here a divided duty. to you i am bound for life and education. my life and education both do learn me how to respect you. you are the lord of duty. i am hitherto your daughter. but here's my husband. and so much duty as my mother showed to you, preferring you before her father, so much i challenge that i may profess due to the moor my lord.", "god be with you. i have done. please it your grace, on to the state affairs. i had rather to adopt a child than get it. come hither, moor. i here do give thee that with all my heart which, but thou hast already, with all my heart i would keep from thee. for your sake, jewel, i am glad at soul i have no other child. for thy escape would teach me tyranny, to hang clogs on them. i have done, my lord.", "let me speak like yourself and lay a sentence which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers. when remedies are past, the griefs are ended by seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended."], ["to mourn a mischief that is past and gone is the next way to draw new mischief on. what cannot be preserved when fortune takes, patience her injury a mock'ry makes. the robbed that smiles steals something from the thief, he robs himself that spends a bootless grief.", "so let the turk of cyprus us beguile, we lose it not, so long as we can smile. he bears the sentence well that nothing bears but the free comfort which from thence he hears. but he bears both the sentence and the sorrow that, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow. these sentences to sugar or to gall, being strong on both sides, are equivocal. but words are words. i never yet did hear that the bruised heart was piercd through the ears. i humbly beseech you, proceed to th' affairs of state.", "the turk with a most mighty preparation makes for cyprus. othello, the fortitude of the place is best known to you, and though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you. you must therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and boist'rous expedition.", "the tyrant custom, most grave senators, hath made the flinty and steel couch of war my thrice-driven bed of down. i do agnize a natural and prompt alacrity i find in hardness, and do undertake these present wars against the ottomites. most humbly therefore bending to your state,"], ["i crave fit disposition for my wife. due reference of place and exhibition, with such accommodation and besort as levels with her breeding.", "why, at her father's.", "i'll not have it so.", "nor i.", "nor would i there reside, to put my father in impatient thoughts by being in his eye. most gracious duke, to my unfolding lend your prosperous ear and let me find a charter in your voice, t' assist my simpleness.", "what would you, desdemona?", "that i did love the moor to live with him, my downright violence and storm of fortunes may trumpet to the world. my heart's subdued even to the very quality of my lord. i saw othello's visage in his mind, and to his honors and his valiant parts did i my soul and fortunes consecrate. so that, dear lords, if i be left behind a moth of peace and he go to the war, the rites for which i love him are bereft me, and i a heavy interim shall support by his dear absence. let me go with him.", "let her have your voice. vouch with me, heaven, i therefore beg it not to please the palate of my appetite,"], ["nor to comply with heat the young affects in my defunct and proper satisfaction, but to be free and bounteous to her mind, and heaven defend your good souls, that you think i will your serious and great business scant when she is with me. no, when light-winged toys of feathered cupid seel with wanton dullness my speculative and officed instrument, that my disports corrupt and taint my business, let housewives make a skillet of my helm and all indign and base adversities make head against my estimation.", "be it as you shall privately determine, either for her stay or going. th' affair cries haste and speed must answer it.", "you must away tonight.", "with all my heart.", "at nine i' th' morning here we'll meet again. othello, leave some officer behind and he shall our commission bring to you, and such things else of quality and respect as doth import you.", "so please your grace, my ancient. a man he is of honesty and trust. to his conveyance i assign my wife, with what else needful your good grace shall think to be sent after me."], ["let it be so. good night to every one. ( brabantio) and, noble signior, if virtue no delighted beauty lack, your son-in-law is far more fair than black.", "adieu, brave moor. use desdemona well.", "look to her, moor, if thou hast eyes to see. she has deceived her father, and may thee.", "my life upon her faith! honest iago, my desdemona must i leave to thee. i prithee, let thy wife attend on her, and bring them after in the best advantage. come, desdemona, i have but an hour of love, of worldly matter and direction, to spend with thee. we must obey the time.", "iago.", "what say'st thou, noble heart?", "what will i do, think'st thou?", "why, go to bed, and sleep.", "i will incontinently drown myself."], ["if thou dost i shall never love thee after. why, thou silly gentleman!", "it is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.", "oh, villainous! i have looked upon the world for four times seven years, and since i could distinguish betwixt a benefit and an injury i never found man that knew how to love himself. ere i would say i would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, i would change my humanity with a baboon.", "what should i do? i confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.", "virtue? a fig! 'tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners. so that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it with many either to have it sterile with idleness, or manured with industry why, the power and corrigible authority of this lies in our wills. if the balance of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most prepost'rous conclusions. but we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings, our unbitted lusts. whereof i take this that you call love to be a sect or scion.", "it cannot be.", "it is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will. come, be a man. drown thyself? drown cats and blind puppies! i have professed me thy friend, and i confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness."], ["i could never better stead thee than now. put money in thy purse. follow thou the wars, defeat thy favor with an usurped beard. i say, put money in thy purse. it cannot be long that desdemona should continue her love to the moor put money in thy purse nor he his to her. it was a violent commencement in her, and thou shalt see an answerable sequestration put but money in thy purse. these moors are changeable in their wills fill thy purse with money. the food that to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida. she must change for youth. when she is sated with his body she will find the errors of her choice. therefore, put money in thy purse. if thou wilt needs damn thyself, do it a more delicate way than drowning. make all the money thou canst. if sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and supersubtle venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her. therefore make money. a pox of drowning thyself! 'tis clean out of the way. seek thou rather to be hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go without her.", "wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if i depend on the issue?", "thou art sure of me. go, make money. i have told thee often, and i re-tell thee again and again, i hate the moor. my cause is hearted. thine hath no less reason. let us be conjunctive in our revenge against him. if thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, me a sport. there are many events in the womb of time which will be delivered. traverse, go, provide thy money. we will have more of this tomorrow. adieu.", "where shall we meet i' th' morning?"], ["at my lodging.", "i'll be with thee betimes.", "go to, farewell. do you hear, roderigo?", "what say you?", "no more of drowning, do you hear?", "i am changed.", "go to, farewell. put money enough in your purse.", "i'll sell all my land.", "thus do i ever make my fool my purse. for i mine own gained knowledge should profane if i would time expend with such a snipe but for my sport and profit. i hate the moor, and it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets he's done my office. i know not if 't be true, but i, for mere suspicion in that kind, will do as if for surety. he holds me well. the better shall my purpose work on him. cassio's a proper man. let me see now,"], ["to get his place and to plume up my will in double knavery. how? how? let's see. after some time, to abuse othello's ear that he is too familiar with his wife. he hath a person and a smooth dispose to be suspected, framed to make women false. the moor is of a free and open nature that thinks men honest that but seem to be so, and will as tenderly be led by th' nose as asses are. i have 't. it is engendered! hell and night must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light."], ["what from the cape can you discern at sea?", "nothing at all. it is a high-wrought flood. i cannot 'twixt the heaven and the main descry a sail.", "methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land, a fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements. if it hath ruffianed so upon the sea what ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them, can hold the mortise? what shall we hear of this?", "a segregation of the turkish fleet. for do but stand upon the foaming shore, the chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds, the wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane, seems to cast water on the burning bear, and quench the guards of th' ever-fixd pole. i never did like molestation view on the enchafd flood.", "if that the turkish fleet be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned. it is impossible they bear it out."], ["news, lads, our wars are done! the desperate tempest hath so banged the turks, that their designment halts. a noble ship of venice hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance on most part of their fleet.", "how? is this true?", "the ship is here put in, a veronesa. michael cassio, lieutenant to the warlike moor othello, is come on shore. the moor himself at sea and is in full commission here for cyprus.", "i am glad on 't. 'tis a worthy governor.", "but this same cassio, though he speak of comfort touching the turkish loss, yet he looks sadly and prays the moor be safe. for they were parted with foul and violent tempest.", "pray heavens he be, for i have served him, and the man commands like a full soldier. let's to the seaside, ho! as well to see the vessel that's come in as to throw out our eyes for brave othello, even till we make the main and th' aerial blue an indistinct regard.", "come, let's do so. for every minute is expectancy of more arrivance."], ["thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle that so approve the moor. oh, let the heavens give him defense against the elements, for i have lost him on a dangerous sea.", "is he well shipped?", "his bark is stoutly timbered and his pilot of very expert and approved allowance therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death, stand in bold cure.", "a sail, a sail, a sail!", "what noise?", "the town is empty. on the brow o' th' sea stand ranks of people, and they cry \"a sail!\"", "my hopes do shape him for the governor.", "they do discharge their shot of courtesy. our friends at least.", "i pray you sir, go forth and give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.", "i shall."], ["but good lieutenant, is your general wived?", "most fortunately. he hath achieved a maid that paragons description and wild fame, one that excels the quirks of blazoning pens, and in th' essential vesture of creation does tire the ingener.", "how now? who has put in?", "'tis one iago, ancient to the general.", "he's had most favorable and happy speed. tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds, the guttered rocks and congregated sands, traitors ensteeped to enclog the guiltless keel, as having sense of beauty, do omit their mortal natures, letting go safely by the divine desdemona.", "what is she?", "she that i spake of, our great captain's captain, left in the conduct of the bold iago, whose footing here anticipates our thoughts a se'nnight's speed. great jove, othello guard, and swell his sail with thine own powerful breath, that he may bless this bay with his tall ship, make love's quick pants in desdemona's arms, give renewed fire to our extincted spirits and bring all cyprus comfort!"], ["oh, behold, the riches of the ship is come on shore! you men of cyprus, let her have your knees. hail to thee, lady, and the grace of heaven, before, behind thee, and on every hand, enwheel thee round!", "i thank you, valiant cassio. what tidings can you tell me of my lord?", "he is not yet arrived. nor know i aught but that he's well and will be shortly here.", "oh, but i fear. how lost you company?", "the great contention of the sea and skies parted our fellowship", "a sail, a sail!", "but, hark! a sail.", "they give this greeting to the citadel. this likewise is a friend.", "see for the news.", "good ancient, you are welcome. welcome, mistress. emilia let it not gall your patience, good iago, that i extend my manners. 'tis my breeding that gives me this bold show of courtesy."], ["sir, would she give you so much of her lips as of her tongue she oft bestows on me, you'll have enough.", "alas, she has no speech!", "in faith, too much. i find it still, when i have leave to sleep. marry, before your ladyship, i grant, she puts her tongue a little in her heart and chides with thinking.", "you have little cause to say so.", "come on, come on. you are pictures out of door, bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens, saints in your injuries, devils being offended, players in your housewifery, and housewives in your beds.", "oh, fie upon thee, slanderer!", "nay, it is true, or else i am a turk. you rise to play and go to bed to work.", "you shall not write my praise.", "no, let me not.", "what wouldst thou write of me, if thou should'st praise me?"], ["o gentle lady, do not put me to 't, for i am nothing, if not critical.", "come on, assay. there's one gone to the harbor?", "ay, madam.", "i am not merry, but i do beguile the thing i am by seeming otherwise. come, how wouldst thou praise me?", "i am about it, but indeed my invention comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze, it plucks out brains and all. but my muse labors and thus she is delivered: if she be fair and wise, fairness and wit, the one's for use, the other useth it.", "well praised! how if she be black and witty?", "if she be black, and thereto have a wit, she'll find a white that shall her blackness fit.", "worse and worse!", "how if fair and foolish?", "she never yet was foolish that was fair, for even her folly helped her to an heir.", "these are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' th' alehouse. what miserable praise hast thou for her that's foul and foolish?", "there's none so foul and foolish thereunto, but does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do."], ["oh, heavy ignorance! thou praisest the worst best. but what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself?", "she that was ever fair and never proud, had tongue at will and yet was never loud, never lacked gold and yet went never gay, fled from her wish and yet said \"now i may,\" she that being angered, her revenge being nigh, bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly, she that in wisdom never was so frail to change the cod's head for the salmon's tail, she that could think and ne'er disclose her mind, see suitors following and not look behind, she was a wight, if ever such wights were", "to do what?", "to suckle fools and chronicle small beer.", "oh, most lame and impotent conclusion! do not learn of him, emilia, though he be thy husband. how say you, cassio? is he not a most profane and liberal counselor?", "he speaks home, madam. you may relish him more in the soldier than in the scholar.", "( ) he takes her by the palm. ay, well said, whisper! with as little a web as this will i ensnare as great a fly as cassio. ay, smile upon her, do, i will gyve thee in thine own courtship. you say true, 'tis so, indeed."], ["if such tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had been better you had not kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are most apt to play the sir in. very good, well kissed, and excellent courtesy! 'tis so, indeed. yet again your fingers to your lips? would they were clyster-pipes for your sake!", "the moor! i know his trumpet.", "'tis truly so.", "let's meet him and receive him.", "lo, where he comes!", "oh my fair warrior!", "my dear othello!", "it gives me wonder great as my content to see you here before me. oh, my soul's joy! if after every tempest come such calms, may the winds blow till they have wakened death, and let the laboring bark climb hills of seas olympus-high, and duck again as low as hell's from heaven! if it were now to die, 'twere now to be most happy, for i fear my soul hath her content so absolute that not another comfort like to this succeeds in unknown fate.", "the heavens forbid but that our loves and comforts should increase, even as our days do grow."], ["amen to that, sweet powers! i cannot speak enough of this content. it stops me here, it is too much of joy. and this, and this, the greatest discords be that e'er our hearts shall make!", "oh, you are well tuned now, but i'll set down the pegs that make this music, as honest as i am.", "come, let us to the castle. news, friends! our wars are done, the turks are drowned. how does my old acquaintance of this isle? honey, you shall be well desired in cyprus, i have found great love amongst them. o my sweet, i prattle out of fashion, and i dote in mine own comforts. i prithee, good iago, go to the bay and disembark my coffers. bring thou the master to the citadel. he is a good one, and his worthiness does challenge much respect. come, desdemona, once more, well met at cyprus.", "do thou meet me presently at the harbor. come hither. if thou be'st valiant, as they say base men being in love have then a nobility in their natures more than is native to them, list me. the lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard. first, i must tell thee this: desdemona is directly in love with him."], ["with him? why, 'tis not possible.", "lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. mark me with what violence she first loved the moor, but for bragging and telling her fantastical lies. to love him still for prating? let not thy discreet heart think it. her eye must be fed, and what delight shall she have to look on the devil? when the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there should be a game to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favor, sympathy in years, manners and beauties. all which the moor is defective in. now for want of these required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find itself abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the moor. very nature will instruct her in it and compel her to some second choice. now sir, this granted as it is a most pregnant and unforced position who stands so eminent in the degree of this fortune as cassio does? a knave very voluble, no further conscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing of his salt and most hidden loose affection. why, none, why, none! a slipper and subtle knave, a finder of occasions that has an eye, can stamp and counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never present itself. a devilish knave. besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after. a pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him already.", "i cannot believe that in her. she's full of most blessed condition.", "blessed fig's-end! the wine she drinks is made of grapes. if she had been blessed, she would never have loved the moor. blessed pudding! didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? didst not mark that?"], ["yes, that i did, but that was but courtesy.", "lechery, by this hand, an index and obscure prologue to the history of lust and foul thoughts. they met so near with their lips that their breaths embraced together. villainous thoughts, roderigo! when these mutabilities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master and main exercise, th' incorporate conclusion. pish! but, sir, be you ruled by me. i have brought you from venice. watch you tonight for the command, i'll lay 't upon you. cassio knows you not. i'll not be far from you. do you find some occasion to anger cassio, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please, which the time shall more favorably minister.", "well.", "sir, he's rash and very sudden in choler, and haply may strike at you. provoke him that he may. for even out of that will i cause these of cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall come into no true taste again but by the displanting of cassio. so shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means i shall then have to prefer them, and the impediment most profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation of our prosperity.", "i will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity.", "i warrant thee. meet me by and by at the citadel. i must fetch his necessaries ashore. farewell.", "adieu."], ["that cassio loves her, i do well believe 't. that she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit. the moor, howbeit that i endure him not, is of a constant, loving, noble nature, and i dare think he'll prove to desdemona a most dear husband. now, i do love her too, not out of absolute lust though peradventure i stand accountant for as great a sin but partly led to diet my revenge, for that i do suspect the lusty moor hath leaped into my seat. the thought whereof doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards, and nothing can or shall content my soul till i am evened with him, wife for wife. or, failing so, yet that i put the moor at least into a jealousy so strong that judgment cannot cure. which thing to do, if this poor trash of venice, whom i trace for his quick hunting, stand the putting on, i'll have our michael cassio on the hip, abuse him to the moor in the right garb (for i fear cassio with my night-cape too) make the moor thank me, love me, and reward me for making him egregiously an ass and practicing upon his peace and quiet even to madness. 'tis here, but yet confused. knavery's plain face is never seen till used."], ["it is othello's pleasure, our noble and valiant general, that, upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere perdition of the turkish fleet, every man put himself into triumph: some to dance, some to make bonfires, each man to what sport and revels his addiction leads him. for besides these beneficial news, it is the celebration of his nuptial. so much was his pleasure should be proclaimed. all offices are open, and there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of five till the bell have told eleven. bless the isle of cyprus and our noble general othello!"], ["good michael, look you to the guard tonight. let's teach ourselves that honorable stop not to outsport discretion.", "iago hath direction what to do, but notwithstanding with my personal eye will i look to 't.", "iago is most honest. michael, good night. tomorrow with your earliest let me have speech with you. come, my dear love, the purchase made, the fruits are to ensue: that profit's yet to come 'tween me and you. good night.", "welcome, iago. we must to the watch.", "not this hour, lieutenant, 'tis not yet ten o' the clock. our general cast us thus early for the love of his desdemona who let us not therefore blame. he hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sport for jove.", "she's a most exquisite lady.", "and, i'll warrant her, full of game."], ["indeed she's a most fresh and delicate creature.", "what an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley to provocation.", "an inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.", "and when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?", "she is indeed perfection.", "well, happiness to their sheets! come, lieutenant, i have a stoup of wine, and here without are a brace of cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to the health of black othello.", "not tonight, good iago. i have very poor and unhappy brains for drinking. i could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of entertainment.", "oh, they are our friends. but one cup. i'll drink for you.", "i have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftily qualified too, and behold what innovation it makes here. i am unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more.", "what, man, 'tis a night of revels! the gallants desire it.", "where are they?", "here at the door. i pray you call them in.", "i'll do 't, but it dislikes me."], ["if i can fasten but one cup upon him, with that which he hath drunk tonight already, he'll be as full of quarrel and offense as my young mistress' dog. now my sick fool roderigo, whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out, to desdemona hath tonight caroused potations pottle-deep, and he's to watch. three lads of cyprus, noble swelling spirits (that hold their honors in a wary distance, the very elements of this warlike isle) have i tonight flustered with flowing cups, and they watch too. now 'mongst this flock of drunkards am i to put our cassio in some action that may offend the isle. but here they come. if consequence do but approve my dream my boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.", "'fore heaven, they have given me a rouse already.", "good faith, a little one, not past a pint, as i am a soldier.", "some wine, ho!"], ["fore heaven, an excellent song.", "i learned it in england where indeed they are most potent in potting. your dane, your german, and your swag-bellied hollander drink, ho! are nothing to your english.", "is your englishman so expert in his drinking?", "why, he drinks you with facility your dane dead drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your almain. he gives your hollander a vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.", "to the health of our general!", "i am for it, lieutenant, and i'll do you justice.", "oh, sweet england!", "why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.", "will you hear 't again?", "no, for i hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those things. well, heaven's above all, and there be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.", "it's true, good lieutenant."], ["for mine own part, no offence to the general nor any man of quality, i hope to be saved.", "and so do i too, lieutenant.", "ay, but (by your leave) not before me. the lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. let's have no more of this, let's to our affairs. forgive us our sins! gentlemen, let's look to our business. do not think, gentlemen, i am drunk. this is my ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. i am not drunk now. i can stand well enough, and i speak well enough.", "excellent well!", "why, very well then. you must not think then that i am drunk.", "to th' platform, masters. come, let's set the watch.", "you see this fellow that is gone before, he is a soldier fit to stand by caesar and give direction. and do but see his vice, 'tis to his virtue a just equinox, the one as long as th' other. 'tis pity of him. i fear the trust othello puts him in on some odd time of his infirmity will shake this island.", "but is he often thus?"], ["'tis evermore the prologue to his sleep. he'll watch the horologe a double set if drink rock not his cradle.", "it were well the general were put in mind of it. perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature prizes the virtue that appears in cassio and looks not on his evils. is not this true?", "how now, roderigo? i pray you, after the lieutenant, go!", "and 'tis great pity that the noble moor should hazard such a place as his own second with one of an ingraft infirmity. it were an honest action to say so to the moor.", "not i, for this fair island. i do love cassio well, and would do much to cure him of this evil", "but, hark! what noise?"], ["zounds! you rogue! you rascal!", "what's the matter, lieutenant?", "a knave teach me my duty? i'll beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.", "beat me?", "dost thou prate, rogue?", "nay, good lieutenant! i pray you, sir, hold your hand.", "let me go, sir, or i'll knock you o'er the mazzard.", "come, come, you're drunk.", "drunk?", "roderigo away, i say, go out, and cry a mutiny.", "nay, good lieutenant! alas, gentlemen help, ho! lieutenant sir, montano help, masters! here's a goodly watch indeed!"], ["who's that which rings the bell? diablo, ho! the town will rise. fie, fie, lieutenant, you'll be ashamed for ever.", "what is the matter here?", "i bleed still, i am hurt to the death. he dies!", "hold, for your lives!", "hold, ho! lieutenant sir, montano gentlemen, have you forgot all place of sense and duty? hold! the general speaks to you. hold, for shame!", "why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this? are we turned turks? and to ourselves do that which heaven hath forbid the ottomites? for christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl. he that stirs next to carve for his own rage holds his soul light, he dies upon his motion. silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle from her propriety. what is the matter, masters? honest iago, that looks dead with grieving, speak, who began this? on thy love, i charge thee.", "i do not know. friends all but now, even now, in quarter, and in terms like bride and groom divesting them for bed. and then, but now, as if some planet had unwitted men,"], ["swords out, and tilting one at other's breasts in opposition bloody. i cannot speak any beginning to this peevish odds, and would in action glorious i had lost those legs that brought me to a part of it.", "how comes it, michael, you are thus forgot?", "i pray you pardon me, i cannot speak.", "worthy montano, you were wont be civil. the gravity and stillness of your youth the world hath noted, and your name is great in mouths of wisest censure. what's the matter that you unlace your reputation thus and spend your rich opinion for the name of a night-brawler? give me answer to it.", "worthy othello, i am hurt to danger. your officer iago can inform you, while i spare speech, which something now offends me, of all that i do know. nor know i aught by me that's said or done amiss this night, unless self-charity be sometimes a vice, and to defend ourselves it be a sin when violence assails us.", "now, by heaven, my blood begins my safer guides to rule, and passion, having my best judgment collied, assays to lead the way. if i once stir,"], ["or do but lift this arm, the best of you shall sink in my rebuke. give me to know how this foul rout began, who set it on, and he that is approved in this offence, though he had twinned with me, both at a birth, shall lose me. what, in a town of war yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear, to manage private and domestic quarrel? in night, and on the court and guard of safety? 'tis monstrous. iago, who began 't?", "if partially affined or leagued in office thou dost deliver more or less than truth thou art no soldier.", "touch me not so near. i had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth than it should do offence to michael cassio. yet i persuade myself to speak the truth shall nothing wrong him. this it is, general: montano and myself being in speech, there comes a fellow crying out for help and cassio following him with determined sword to execute upon him. sir, this gentleman steps in to cassio and entreats his pause, myself the crying fellow did pursue, lest by his clamor as it so fell out the town might fall in fright. he, swift of foot, outran my purpose, and i returned then rather for that i heard the clink and fall of swords and cassio high in oath, which till tonight i ne'er might say before. when i came back for this was brief i found them close together at blow and thrust, even as again they were when you yourself did part them. more of this matter cannot i report."], ["but men are men, the best sometimes forget. though cassio did some little wrong to him, as men in rage strike those that wish them best, yet surely cassio, i believe, received from him that fled some strange indignity which patience could not pass.", "i know, iago, thy honesty and love doth mince this matter, making it light to cassio. cassio, i love thee but never more be officer of mine.", "look, if my gentle love be not raised up! i'll make thee an example.", "what's the matter, dear?", "all's well, sweeting, come away to bed. montano sir, for your hurts myself will be your surgeon. lead him off.", "iago, look with care about the town and silence those whom this vile brawl distracted. come, desdemona, 'tis the soldiers' life to have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.", "what, are you hurt, lieutenant?", "ay, past all surgery.", "marry, heaven forbid!"], ["reputation, reputation, reputation! oh, i have lost my reputation! i have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial. my reputation, iago, my reputation!", "as i am an honest man, i thought you had received some bodily wound. there is more sense in that than in reputation. reputation is an idle and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost without deserving. you have lost no reputation at all unless you repute yourself such a loser. what, man, there are ways to recover the general again. you are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in policy than in malice, even so as one would beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious lion. sue to him again and he's yours.", "i will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer. drunk? and speak parrot? and squabble? swagger? swear? and discourse fustian with one's own shadow? o thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call thee devil!", "what was he that you followed with your sword? what had he done to you?", "i know not.", "is 't possible?", "i remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly. a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. oh, that men should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains! that we should, with joy, pleasance revel and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!"], ["why, but you are now well enough. how came you thus recovered?", "it hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the devil wrath. one unperfectness shows me another, to make me frankly despise myself.", "come, you are too severe a moraler. as the time, the place, and the condition of this country stands, i could heartily wish this had not befallen. but since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.", "i will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me i am a drunkard. had i as many mouths as hydra, such an answer would stop them all. to be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a beast! oh, strange! every inordinate cup is unblessed and the ingredient is a devil.", "come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used. exclaim no more against it. and, good lieutenant, i think you think i love you.", "i have well approved it, sir. i drunk!", "you or any man living may be drunk at a time, man. i tell you what you shall do. our general's wife is now the general. i may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and graces. confess yourself freely to her, importune her help to put you in your place again. she is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested. this broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before."], ["you advise me well.", "i protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.", "i think it freely, and betimes in the morning i will beseech the virtuous desdemona to undertake for me. i am desperate of my fortunes if they check me.", "you are in the right. good night, lieutenant, i must to the watch.", "good night, honest iago.", "and what's he then that says i play the villain? when this advice is free i give and honest, probal to thinking and indeed the course to win the moor again? for 'tis most easy th' inclining desdemona to subdue in any honest suit. she's framed as fruitful as the free elements. and then for her to win the moor, were to renounce his baptism, all seals and symbols of redeemd sin, his soul is so enfettered to her love, that she may make, unmake, do what she list, even as her appetite shall play the god with his weak function. how am i then a villain to counsel cassio to this parallel course, directly to his good? divinity of hell! when devils will the blackest sins put on they do suggest at first with heavenly shows as i do now. for whiles this honest fool plies desdemona to repair his fortune and she for him pleads strongly to the moor, i'll pour this pestilence into his ear:"], ["that she repeals him for her body's lust. and by how much she strives to do him good she shall undo her credit with the moor. so will i turn her virtue into pitch and out of her own goodness make the net that shall enmesh them all.", "how now, roderigo!", "i do follow here in the chase not like a hound that hunts, but one that fills up the cry. my money is almost spent, i have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled, and i think the issue will be i shall have so much experience for my pains. and so, with no money at all and a little more wit, return again to venice.", "how poor are they that have not patience! what wound did ever heal but by degrees? thou know'st we work by wit and not by witchcraft, and wit depends on dilatory time. does't not go well? cassio hath beaten thee. and thou, by that small hurt, hath cashiered cassio. though other things grow fair against the sun, yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe. content thyself awhile. in troth, 'tis morning. pleasure and action make the hours seem short. retire thee, go where thou art billeted. away, i say, thou shalt know more hereafter. nay, get thee gone."], ["two things are to be done: my wife must move for cassio to her mistress. i'll set her on. myself, the while, to draw the moor apart and bring him jump when he may cassio find soliciting his wife. ay, that's the way. dull not device by coldness and delay."], ["masters, play here, i will content your pains. something that's brief, and bid \"good morrow, general.\"", "why masters, have your instruments been in naples, that they speak i' th' nose thus?", "how, sir? how?", "are these, i pray you, wind instruments?", "ay, marry, are they, sir.", "oh, thereby hangs a tail.", "whereby hangs a tale, sir?", "marry sir, by many a wind instrument that i know. but, masters, here's money for you, and the general so likes your music that he desires you, for love's sake, to make no more noise with it.", "well, sir, we will not."], ["if you have any music that may not be heard, to 't again. but, as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly care.", "we have none such, sir.", "then put up your pipes in your bag, for i'll away. go, vanish into air, away!", "dost thou hear, my honest friend?", "no, i hear not your honest friend, i hear you.", "prithee, keep up thy quillets. there's a poor piece of gold for thee. if the gentlewoman that attends the general's wife be stirring, tell her there's one cassio entreats her a little favour of speech. wilt thou do this?", "she is stirring, sir. if she will stir hither, i shall seem to notify unto her.", "in happy time, iago.", "you have not been abed, then?", "why, no. the day had broke before we parted. i have made bold, iago, to send in to your wife. my suit to her is that she will to virtuous desdemona procure me some access."], ["i'll send her to you presently, and i'll devise a mean to draw the moor out of the way, that your converse and business may be more free.", "i humbly thank you for't.", "i never knew a florentine more kind and honest.", "good morrow, good lieutenant. i am sorry for your displeasure, but all will sure be well. the general and his wife are talking of it, and she speaks for you stoutly. the moor replies that he you hurt is of great fame in cyprus and great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom he might not but refuse you. but he protests he loves you and needs no other suitor but his likings to take the safest occasion by the front to bring you in again.", "yet i beseech you, if you think fit, or that it may be done, give me advantage of some brief discourse with desdemona alone.", "pray you come in. i will bestow you where you shall have time to speak your bosom freely.", "i am much bound to you."], ["these letters give, iago, to the pilot, and by him do my duties to the senate. that done, i will be walking on the works, repair there to me.", "well, my good lord, i'll do 't.", "this fortification, gentlemen, shall we see 't?", "we'll wait upon your lordship."], ["be thou assured, good cassio, i will do all my abilities in thy behalf.", "good madam, do. i warrant it grieves my husband as if the cause were his.", "oh, that's an honest fellow. do not doubt, cassio, but i will have my lord and you again as friendly as you were.", "bounteous madam, whatever shall become of michael cassio, he's never anything but your true servant.", "i know 't, i thank you. you do love my lord. you have known him long, and be you well assured he shall in strangeness stand no farther off than in a polite distance.", "ay, but, lady, that policy may either last so long, or feed upon such nice and waterish diet, or breed itself so out of circumstances, that, i being absent and my place supplied, my general will forget my love and service.", "do not doubt that. before emilia here i give thee warrant of thy place. assure thee, if i do vow a friendship, i'll perform it to the last article. my lord shall never rest, i'll watch him tame and talk him out of patience."], ["his bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift, i'll intermingle everything he does with cassio's suit. therefore be merry, cassio, for thy solicitor shall rather die than give thy cause away.", "madam, here comes my lord.", "madam, i'll take my leave.", "why, stay and hear me speak.", "madam, not now. i am very ill at ease, unfit for mine own purposes.", "well, do your discretion.", "ha! i like not that.", "what dost thou say?", "nothing, my lord, or if i know not what.", "was not that cassio parted from my wife?", "cassio, my lord? no, sure, i cannot think it that he would steal away so guilty-like seeing you coming.", "i do believe 'twas he."], ["how now, my lord? i have been talking with a suitor here, a man that languishes in your displeasure.", "who is 't you mean?", "why, your lieutenant, cassio. good my lord, if i have any grace or power to move you his present reconciliation take. for if he be not one that truly loves you, that errs in ignorance and not in cunning, i have no judgment in an honest face. i prithee, call him back.", "went he hence now?", "ay, sooth, so humbled that he hath left part of his grief with me to suffer with him. good love, call him back.", "not now, sweet desdemona. some other time.", "but shall 't be shortly?", "the sooner, sweet, for you.", "shall 't be tonight at supper?", "no, not tonight.", "tomorrow dinner, then?", "i shall not dine at home, i meet the captains at the citadel."], ["why, then, tomorrow night, or tuesday morn. on tuesday noon, or night, or wednesday morn. i prithee name the time, but let it not exceed three days. in faith, he's penitent, and yet his trespass, in our common reason (save that, they say, the wars must make example out of her best) is not, almost, a fault t' incur a private check. when shall he come? tell me, othello. i wonder in my soul what you would ask me that i should deny or stand so mamm'ring on. what? michael cassio that came a-wooing with you, and so many a time, when i have spoke of you dispraisingly, hath ta'en your part, to have so much to do to bring him in? trust me, i could do much", "prithee, no more. let him come when he will, i will deny thee nothing.", "why, this is not a boon, 'tis as i should entreat you wear your gloves, or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm, or sue to you to do a peculiar profit to your own person. nay, when i have a suit wherein i mean to touch your love indeed it shall be full of poise and difficult weight and fearful to be granted.", "i will deny thee nothing! whereon i do beseech thee, grant me this, to leave me but a little to myself.", "shall i deny you? no. farewell, my lord.", "farewell, my desdemona. i'll come to thee straight."], ["emilia, come. be as your fancies teach you. whate'er you be, i am obedient.", "excellent wretch! perdition catch my soul but i do love thee! and when i love thee not chaos is come again.", "my noble lord", "what dost thou say, iago?", "did michael cassio, when you wooed my lady, know of your love?", "he did, from first to last. why dost thou ask?", "but for a satisfaction of my thought, no further harm.", "why of thy thought, iago?", "i did not think he had been acquainted with her.", "oh, yes, and went between us very oft.", "indeed?", "indeed? ay, indeed! discern'st thou aught in that? is he not honest?", "honest, my lord?"], ["honest, ay, honest.", "my lord, for aught i know.", "what dost thou think?", "think, my lord?", "\"think, my lord?\" alas, thou echo'st me as if there were some monster in thy thought too hideous to be shown. thou dost mean something. i heard thee say even now thou lik'st not that when cassio left my wife. what didst not like? and when i told thee he was of my counsel of my whole course of wooing, thou cried'st \"indeed?\" and didst contract and purse thy brow together as if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain some horrible conceit. if thou dost love me show me thy thought.", "my lord, you know i love you.", "i think thou dost. and for i know thou 'rt full of love and honesty and weigh'st thy words before thou giv'st them breath, therefore these stops of thine fright me the more. for such things in a false disloyal knave are tricks of custom, but in a man that's just they are close dilations, working from the heart, that passion cannot rule.", "for michael cassio, i dare be sworn, i think, that he is honest.", "i think so too."], ["men should be what they seem, or those that be not, would they might seem none!", "certain, men should be what they seem.", "why then i think cassio's an honest man.", "nay, yet there's more in this. i prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings, as thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts the worst of words.", "good my lord, pardon me, though i am bound to every act of duty i am not bound to that all slaves are free to. utter my thoughts? why, say they are vile and false, as where's that palace whereinto foul things sometimes intrude not? who has that breast so pure wherein uncleanly apprehensions keep leets and law-days and in sessions sit with meditations lawful?", "thou dost conspire against thy friend, iago, if thou but think'st him wronged and mak'st his ear a stranger to thy thoughts.", "i do beseech you, though i perchance am vicious in my guess, as, i confess, it is my nature's plague to spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy shapes faults that are not, that your wisdom, from one that so imperfectly conceits, would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble out of his scattering and unsure observance. it were not for your quiet nor your good,"], ["nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom to let you know my thoughts.", "what dost thou mean?", "good name in man and woman, dear my lord, is the immediate jewel of their souls. who steals my purse steals trash. 'tis something, nothing: 'twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands. but he that filches from me my good name robs me of that which not enriches him and makes me poor indeed.", "i'll know thy thoughts.", "you cannot, if my heart were in your hand, nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.", "ha!", "oh, beware, my lord, of jealousy! it is the green-eyed monster which doth mock the meat it feeds on. that cuckold lives in bliss who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger, but, oh, what damnd minutes tells he o'er who dotes, yet doubts suspects, yet soundly loves!", "oh, misery!", "poor and content is rich, and rich enough, but riches fineless is as poor as winter to him that ever fears he shall be poor. good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend from jealousy!"], ["why, why is this? think'st thou i'd make a life of jealousy, to follow still the changes of the moon with fresh suspicions? no! to be once in doubt is to be resolved. exchange me for a goat when i shall turn the business of my soul to such exsufflicate and blowed surmises, matching thy inference. 'tis not to make me jealous to say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company, is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances. where virtue is, these are more virtuous. nor from mine own weak merits will i draw the smallest fear or doubt of her revolt, for she had eyes and chose me. no, iago, i'll see before i doubt, when i doubt, prove, and on the proof there is no more but this: away at once with love or jealousy!", "i am glad of this, for now i shall have reason to show the love and duty that i bear you with franker spirit. therefore, as i am bound, receive it from me. i speak not yet of proof. look to your wife, observe her well with cassio. wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure. i would not have your free and noble nature out of self-bounty be abused. look to 't. i know our country disposition well. in venice they do let god see the pranks they dare not show their husbands. their best conscience is not to leave 't undone, but keep't unknown.", "dost thou say so?"], ["she did deceive her father, marrying you, and when she seemed to shake and fear your looks, she loved them most.", "and so she did.", "why, go to then. she that, so young, could give out such a seeming, to seel her father's eyes up close as oak, he thought 'twas witchcraft. but i am much to blame. i humbly do beseech you of your pardon for too much loving you.", "i am bound to thee forever.", "i see this hath a little dashed your spirits.", "not a jot, not a jot.", "trust me, i fear it has. i hope you will consider what is spoke comes from my love. but i do see you're moved. i am to pray you not to strain my speech to grosser issues nor to larger reach than to suspicion.", "i will not.", "should you do so, my lord, my speech should fall into such vile success which my thoughts aimed not at. cassio's my worthy friend my lord, i see you're moved."], ["no, not much moved. i do not think but desdemona's honest.", "long live she so. and long live you to think so.", "and yet how nature, erring from itself", "ay, there's the point. as, to be bold with you, not to affect many proposd matches of her own clime, complexion, and degree, whereto we see in all things nature tends foh! one may smell in such a will most rank, foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural. but pardon me i do not in position distinctly speak of her, though i may fear her will, recoiling to her better judgment, may fall to match you with her country forms, and happily repent.", "farewell, farewell. if more thou dost perceive, let me know more. set on thy wife to observe. leave me, iago.", "my lord, i take my leave.", "why did i marry? this honest creature doubtless sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.", "my lord, i would i might entreat your honor to scan this thing no farther. leave it to time. although 'tis fit that cassio have his place, for sure, he fills it up with great ability, yet, if you please to hold him off awhile, you shall by that perceive him and his means. note if your lady strain his entertainment"], ["with any strong or vehement importunity. much will be seen in that. in the meantime, let me be thought too busy in my fears as worthy cause i have to fear i am and hold her free, i do beseech your honor.", "fear not my government.", "i once more take my leave.", "this fellow's of exceeding honesty and knows all quantities, with a learnd spirit, of human dealings. if i do prove her haggard, though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings, i'd whistle her off and let her down the wind to prey at fortune. haply, for i am black and have not those soft parts of conversation that chamberers have, or for i am declined into the vale of years yet that's not much she's gone, i am abused, and my relief must be to loathe her. oh, curse of marriage that we can call these delicate creatures ours and not their appetites! i had rather be a toad and live upon the vapor of a dungeon than keep a corner in the thing i love for others' uses. yet 'tis the plague to great ones, prerogatived are they less than the base. 'tis destiny unshunnable, like death. even then this forkd plague is fated to us when we do quicken. look where she comes.", "if she be false, heaven mocked itself. i'll not believe 't."], ["how now, my dear othello? your dinner, and the generous islanders by you invited, do attend your presence.", "i am to blame.", "why do you speak so faintly? are you not well?", "i have a pain upon my forehead, here.", "why that's with watching, 'twill away again. let me but bind it hard, within this hour it will be well.", "your napkin is too little, let it alone.", "come, i'll go in with you.", "i am very sorry that you are not well.", "i am glad i have found this napkin, this was her first remembrance from the moor. my wayward husband hath a hundred times"], ["wooed me to steal it, but she so loves the token (for he conjured her she should ever keep it) that she reserves it evermore about her to kiss and talk to. i'll have the work ta'en out and give 't iago. what he will do with it heaven knows, not i. i nothing but to please his fantasy.", "how now! what do you here alone?", "do not you chide. i have a thing for you.", "a thing for me? it is a common thing", "ha?", "to have a foolish wife.", "oh, is that all? what will you give me now for the same handkerchief?", "what handkerchief?", "what handkerchief? why, that the moor first gave to desdemona, that which so often you did bid me steal.", "hast stolen it from her?", "no, but she let it drop by negligence and, to th' advantage, i being here, took 't up. look, here it is."], ["a good wench, give it me.", "what will you do with 't, that you have been so earnest to have me filch it?", "why, what is that to you?", "if it be not for some purpose of import, give 't me again. poor lady, she'll run mad when she shall lack it.", "be not acknown on 't, i have use for it. go, leave me.", "i will in cassio's lodging lose this napkin and let him find it. trifles light as air are to the jealous confirmations strong as proofs of holy writ. this may do something. the moor already changes with my poison. dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons which at the first are scarce found to distaste, but with a little act upon the blood burn like the mines of sulfur.", "i did say so. look, where he comes. not poppy nor mandragora nor all the drowsy syrups of the world, shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep which thou owedst yesterday.", "ha! ha! false to me?", "why, how now, general? no more of that."], ["avaunt! be gone! thou hast set me on the rack. i swear 'tis better to be much abused than but to know 't a little.", "how now, my lord!", "what sense had i in her stol'n hours of lust? i saw 't not, thought it not, it harmed not me. i slept the next night well, fed well, was free and merry. i found not cassio's kisses on her lips. he that is robbed, not wanting what is stol'n, let him not know't, and he's not robbed at all.", "i am sorry to hear this.", "i had been happy if the general camp, pioneers and all, had tasted her sweet body, so i had nothing known. oh, now forever farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content! farewell the plumd troops and the big wars that makes ambition virtue! oh, farewell! farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump, the spirit-stirring drum, th' ear-piercing fife, the royal banner, and all quality, pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war! and o you mortal engines, whose rude throats the immortal jove's dead clamors counterfeit, farewell! othello's occupation's gone.", "is 't possible, my lord?", "villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore, be sure of it. give me the ocular proof or by the worth of mine eternal soul thou hadst been better have been born a dog than answer my waked wrath!"], ["is 't come to this?", "make me to see 't, or at the least so prove it that the probation bear no hinge nor loop to hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!", "my noble lord", "if thou dost slander her and torture me, never pray more. abandon all remorse. on horror's head horrors accumulate, do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed, for nothing canst thou to damnation add greater than that.", "oh, grace! oh, heaven forgive me! are you a man? have you a soul or sense? god buy you, take mine office. o wretched fool that lov'st to make thine honesty a vice! o monstrous world! take note, take note, o world, to be direct and honest is not safe. i thank you for this profit, and from hence i'll love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.", "nay, stay. thou shouldst be honest.", "i should be wise, for honesty's a fool and loses that it works for.", "by the world, i think my wife be honest and think she is not. i think that thou art just and think thou art not. i'll have some proof. her name, that was as fresh as dian's visage, is now begrimed and black as mine own face. if there be cords or knives, poison, or fire, or suffocating streams, i'll not endure it. would i were satisfied!"], ["i see, sir, you are eaten up with passion. i do repent me that i put it to you. you would be satisfied?", "would? nay, and i will.", "and may, but how? how satisfied, my lord? would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on, behold her topped?", "death and damnation! oh!", "it were a tedious difficulty, i think, to bring them to that prospect. damn them then, if ever mortal eyes do see them bolster more than their own! what then? how then? what shall i say? where's satisfaction? it is impossible you should see this, were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys, as salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross as ignorance made drunk. but yet, i say, if imputation and strong circumstances which lead directly to the door of truth will give you satisfaction, you may have 't.", "give me a living reason she's disloyal.", "i do not like the office. but, sith i am entered in this cause so far, pricked to 't by foolish honesty and love, i will go on. i lay with cassio lately and, being troubled with a raging tooth, i could not sleep. there are a kind of men so loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter"], ["their affairs. one of this kind is cassio. in sleep i heard him say \"sweet desdemona, let us be wary, let us hide our loves.\" and then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand, cry \"o sweet creature!\" and then kiss me hard, as if he plucked up kisses by the roots that grew upon my lips, lay his leg over my thigh, and sigh, and kiss, and then cry \"cursed fate that gave thee to the moor!\"", "oh, monstrous! monstrous!", "nay, this was but his dream.", "but this denoted a foregone conclusion.", "'tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream. and this may help to thicken other proofs that do demonstrate thinly.", "i'll tear her all to pieces!", "nay, yet be wise, yet we see nothing done, she may be honest yet. tell me but this, have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand?", "i gave her such a one, 'twas my first gift.", "i know not that, but such a handkerchief i am sure it was your wife's did i today see cassio wipe his beard with.", "if it be that", "if it be that, or any that was hers, it speaks against her with the other proofs."], ["oh, that the slave had forty thousand lives! one is too poor, too weak for my revenge. now do i see 'tis true. look here, iago, all my fond love thus do i blow to heaven. 'tis gone. arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell! yield up, o love, thy crown and hearted throne to tyrannous hate! swell, bosom, with thy fraught, for 'tis of aspics' tongues!", "yet be content.", "oh, blood, blood, blood!", "patience, i say. your mind may change.", "never, iago. like to the pontic sea, whose icy current and compulsive course ne'er keeps retiring ebb but keeps due on to the propontic and the hellespont, even so my bloody thoughts with violent pace shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love till that a capable and wide revenge swallow them up. now, by yon marble heaven, in the due reverence of a sacred vow i here engage my words.", "do not rise yet. witness, you ever-burning lights above, you elements that clip us round about, witness that here iago doth give up the execution of his wit, hands, heart, to wronged othello's service. let him command, and to obey shall be in me remorse, what bloody business ever."], ["i greet thy love not with vain thanks but with acceptance bounteous, and will upon the instant put thee to 't. within these three days let me hear thee say that cassio's not alive.", "my friend is dead, 'tis done at your request. but let her live.", "damn her, lewd minx! oh, damn her, damn her! come, go with me apart. i will withdraw to furnish me with some swift means of death for the fair devil. now art thou my lieutenant.", "i am your own for ever."], ["do you know, sirrah, where lieutenant cassio lies?", "i dare not say he lies anywhere.", "why, man?", "he's a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies, 'tis stabbing.", "go to. where lodges he?", "to tell you where he lodges is to tell you where i lie.", "can anything be made of this?", "i know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging and say he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.", "can you inquire him out and be edified by report?", "i will catechize the world for him, that is, make questions, and by them answer.", "seek him, bid him come hither. tell him i have moved my lord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.", "to do this is within the compass of man's wit, and therefore i will attempt the doing it."], ["where should i lose that handkerchief, emilia?", "i know not, madam.", "believe me, i had rather have lost my purse full of crusadoes. and but my noble moor is true of mind and made of no such baseness as jealous creatures are, it were enough to put him to ill thinking.", "is he not jealous?", "who, he? i think the sun where he was born drew all such humors from him.", "look where he comes.", "i will not leave him now till cassio be called to him. how is 't with you, my lord?", "well, my good lady. oh, hardness to dissemble! how do you, desdemona?", "well, my good lord.", "give me your hand. this hand is moist, my lady.", "it hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.", "this argues fruitfulness and liberal heart. hot, hot, and moist. this hand of yours requires a sequester from liberty, fasting, and prayer,"], ["much castigation, exercise devout, for here's a young and sweating devil here, that commonly rebels. 'tis a good hand, a frank one.", "you may indeed say so, for 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.", "a liberal hand. the hearts of old gave hands, but our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.", "i cannot speak of this. come now, your promise.", "what promise, chuck?", "i have sent to bid cassio come speak with you.", "i have a salt and sorry rheum offends me. lend me thy handkerchief.", "here, my lord.", "that which i gave you.", "i have it not about me.", "not?", "no, indeed, my lord.", "that's a fault. that handkerchief did an egyptian to my mother give, she was a charmer and could almost read"], ["the thoughts of people. she told her, while she kept it 'twould make her amiable and subdue my father entirely to her love, but if she lost it or made gift of it, my father's eye should hold her loathd and his spirits should hunt after new fancies. she, dying, gave it me and bid me, when my fate would have me wived, to give it her. i did so, and take heed on 't, make it a darling like your precious eye. to lose 't or give 't away were such perdition as nothing else could match.", "is 't possible?", "'tis true. there's magic in the web of it. a sibyl, that had numbered in the world the sun to course two hundred compasses, in her prophetic fury sewed the work. the worms were hallowed that did breed the silk, and it was dyed in mummy which the skillful conserved of maidens' hearts.", "indeed? is 't true?", "most veritable, therefore look to 't well.", "then would to heaven that i had never seen 't!", "ha! wherefore?", "why do you speak so startingly and rash?", "is 't lost? is 't gone? speak, is 't out o' th' way?", "bless us!"], ["say you?", "it is not lost, but what and if it were?", "how!", "i say, it is not lost.", "fetch 't, let me see 't.", "why, so i can, sir, but i will not now. this is a trick to put me from my suit. pray you, let cassio be received again.", "fetch me the handkerchief my mind misgives.", "come, come, you'll never meet a more sufficient man.", "the handkerchief!", "a man that all his time hath founded his good fortunes on your love, shared dangers with you", "the handkerchief!", "in sooth, you are to blame.", "away!", "is not this man jealous?"], ["i ne'er saw this before. sure, there's some wonder in this handkerchief, i am most unhappy in the loss of it.", "'tis not a year or two shows us a man. they are all but stomachs, and we all but food. to eat us hungerly, and when they are full, they belch us. look you, cassio and my husband!", "there is no other way. 'tis she must do 't, and, lo, the happiness! go and importune her.", "how now, good cassio, what's the news with you?", "madam, my former suit. i do beseech you that by your virtuous means i may again exist, and be a member of his love whom i, with all the office of my heart entirely honor. i would not be delayed. if my offence be of such mortal kind that nor my service past, nor present sorrows, nor purposed merit in futurity, can ransom me into his love again, but to know so must be my benefit. so shall i clothe me in a forced content, and shut myself up in some other course, to fortune's alms."], ["alas, thrice-gentle cassio, my advocation is not now in tune. my lord is not my lord, nor should i know him were he in favor as in humor altered. so help me every spirit sanctified as i have spoken for you all my best and stood within the blank of his displeasure for my free speech. you must awhile be patient. what i can do i will, and more i will than for myself i dare. let that suffice you.", "is my lord angry?", "he went hence but now, and certainly in strange unquietness.", "can he be angry? i have seen the cannon when it hath blown his ranks into the air and, like the devil, from his very arm puffed his own brother and is he angry? something of moment then, i will go meet him. there's matter in 't indeed, if he be angry.", "i prithee, do so.", "something, sure, of state, either from venice, or some unhatched practice made demonstrable here in cyprus to him, hath puddled his clear spirit, and in such cases men's natures wrangle with inferior things, though great ones are their object. 'tis even so, for let our finger ache and it endues our other healthful members even to that sense of pain. nay, we must think men are not gods, nor of them look for such observances as fit the bridal. beshrew me much, emilia, i was, unhandsome warrior as i am, arraigning his unkindness with my soul, but now i find i had suborned the witness, and he's indicted falsely."], ["pray heaven it be state matters, as you think, and no conception nor no jealous toy concerning you.", "alas the day! i never gave him cause.", "but jealous souls will not be answered so. they are not ever jealous for the cause, but jealous for they're jealous. it is a monster begot upon itself, born on itself.", "heaven keep the monster from othello's mind!", "lady, amen.", "i will go seek him. cassio, walk hereabout. if i do find him fit, i'll move your suit and seek to effect it to my uttermost.", "i humbly thank your ladyship.", "save you, friend cassio!"], ["what make you from home? how is 't with you, my most fair bianca? indeed, sweet love, i was coming to your house.", "and i was going to your lodging, cassio. what, keep a week away? seven days and nights? eight score eight hours? and lovers' absent hours more tedious than the dial eightscore times! oh weary reckoning!", "pardon me, bianca, i have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed, but i shall, in a more continuate time, strike off this score of absence. sweet bianca, desdemona take me this work out.", "o cassio, whence came this? this is some token from a newer friend! to the felt absence now i feel a cause. is 't come to this? well, well.", "go to, woman, throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth from whence you have them. you are jealous now that this is from some mistress, some remembrance. no, in good troth, bianca.", "why, whose is it?", "i know not neither, i found it in my chamber. i like the work well. ere it be demanded, as like enough it will, i would have it copied. take it and do 't, and leave me for this time.", "leave you! wherefore?"], ["i do attend here on the general and think it no addition, nor my wish, to have him see me womaned.", "why, i pray you?", "not that i love you not.", "but that you do not love me. i pray you bring me on the way a little and say if i shall see you soon at night.", "'tis but a little way that i can bring you, for i attend here. but i'll see you soon.", "'tis very good. i must be circumstanced."], ["will you think so?", "think so, iago?", "what, to kiss in private?", "an unauthorized kiss!", "or to be naked with her friend in bed an hour or more, not meaning any harm?", "naked in bed, iago, and not mean harm! it is hypocrisy against the devil. they that mean virtuously, and yet do so, the devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.", "so they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip. but if i give my wife a handkerchief", "what then?", "why then 'tis hers, my lord, and, being hers, she may, i think, bestow 't on any man.", "she is protectress of her honor too. may she give that?"], ["her honor is an essence that's not seen, they have it very oft that have it not. but for the handkerchief", "by heaven, i would most gladly have forgot it. thou saidst oh, it comes o'er my memory, as doth the raven o'er the infectious house, boding to all he had my handkerchief.", "ay, what of that?", "that's not so good now.", "what if i had said i had seen him do you wrong? or heard him say as knaves be such abroad, who having, by their own importunate suit, or voluntary dotage of some mistress, convincd or supplied them, cannot choose but they must blab", "hath he said any thing?", "he hath, my lord, but be you well assured no more than he'll unswear.", "what hath he said?", "why, that he did i know not what he did.", "what? what?", "lie", "with her?"], ["with her, on her, what you will.", "lie with her? lie on her? we say \"lie on her\" when they belie her! lie with her that's fulsome. handkerchief confessions handkerchief! to confess, and be hanged for his labor. first to be hanged, and then to confess i tremble at it. nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without some instruction. it is not words that shake me thus. pish! noses, ears, and lips. is 't possible? confess! handkerchief! oh, devil!", "work on, my medicine, work! thus credulous fools are caught, and many worthy and chaste dames even thus, all guiltless, meet reproach. what, ho! my lord! my lord, i say! othello!", "how now, cassio!", "what's the matter?", "my lord is fall'n into an epilepsy. this is his second fit. he had one yesterday.", "rub him about the temples.", "no, forbear. the lethargy must have his quiet course. if not, he foams at mouth and by and by breaks out to savage madness. look, he stirs. do you withdraw yourself a little while,"], ["he will recover straight. when he is gone i would on great occasion speak with you.", "how is it, general? have you not hurt your head?", "dost thou mock me?", "i mock you not, by heaven. would you would bear your fortune like a man!", "a hornd man's a monster and a beast.", "there's many a beast then in a populous city, and many a civil monster.", "did he confess it?", "good sir, be a man, think every bearded fellow that's but yoked may draw with you. there's millions now alive that nightly lie in those unproper beds which they dare swear peculiar. your case is better. oh, 'tis the spite of hell, the fiend's arch-mock, to lip a wanton in a secure couch, and to suppose her chaste. no, let me know, and knowing what i am, i know what she shall be.", "oh, thou art wise! 'tis certain.", "stand you awhile apart, confine yourself but in a patient list. whilst you were here o'erwhelmd with your grief a passion most resulting such a man cassio came hither. i shifted him away and laid good 'scuses upon your ecstasy,"], ["bade him anon return and here speak with me, the which he promised. do but encave yourself, and mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns that dwell in every region of his face. for i will make him tell the tale anew where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when he hath, and is again to cope your wife. i say, but mark his gesture. marry, patience, or i shall say you are all in all in spleen, and nothing of a man.", "dost thou hear, iago? i will be found most cunning in my patience, but dost thou hear? most bloody.", "that's not amiss, but yet keep time in all. will you withdraw?", "now will i question cassio of bianca, a huswife that by selling her desires buys herself bread and clothes. it is a creature that dotes on cassio, as 'tis the strumpet's plague to beguile many and be beguiled by one. he, when he hears of her, cannot refrain from the excess of laughter. here he comes.", "as he shall smile, othello shall go mad. and his unbookish jealousy must construe poor cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behavior quite in the wrong. how do you now, lieutenant?"], ["the worser that you give me the addition whose want even kills me.", "ply desdemona well, and you are sure on 't. now if this suit lay in bianca's power how quickly should you speed!", "alas, poor caitiff!", "look how he laughs already!", "i never knew woman love man so.", "alas, poor rogue, i think indeed she loves me.", "now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.", "do you hear, cassio?", "now he importunes him to tell it o'er. go to, well said, well said.", "she gives it out that you shall marry her. do you intend it?", "ha, ha, ha!", "do ye triumph, roman? do you triumph?", "i marry her! what? a customer? prithee bear some charity to my wit. do not think it so unwholesome. ha, ha, ha!", "so, so, so, so! they laugh that win!"], ["why the cry goes that you shall marry her.", "prithee say true!", "i am a very villain else.", "have you scored me? well.", "this is the monkey's own giving out. she is persuaded i will marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.", "iago beckons me. now he begins the story.", "she was here even now. she haunts me in every place. i was the other day talking on the sea-bank with certain venetians, and thither comes the bauble and, by this hand, she falls me thus about my neck", "crying \"o dear cassio!\" as it were. his gesture imports it.", "so hangs and lolls and weeps upon me, so shakes, and pulls me! ha, ha, ha!", "now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. oh, i see that nose of yours, but not that dog i shall throw it to.", "well, i must leave her company.", "before me! look, where she comes."], ["'tis such another fitchew. marry, a perfumed one. what do you mean by this haunting of me?", "let the devil and his dam haunt you! what did you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now? i was a fine fool to take it. i must take out the work? a likely piece of work, that you should find it in your chamber, and not know who left it there! this is some minx's token, and i must take out the work? there, give it your hobby-horse. wheresoever you had it, i'll take out no work on 't.", "how now, my sweet bianca! how now, how now?", "by heaven, that should be my handkerchief!", "if you'll come to supper tonight, you may. if you will not, come when you are next prepared for.", "after her, after her.", "i must, she'll rail in the street else.", "will you sup there?", "yes, i intend so.", "well, i may chance to see you, for i would very fain speak with you.", "prithee come, will you?", "go to! say no more."], ["how shall i murder him, iago?", "did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?", "o iago!", "and did you see the handkerchief?", "was that mine?", "yours by this hand. and to see how he prizes the foolish woman your wife! she gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.", "i would have him nine years a-killing. a fine woman! a fair woman! a sweet woman!", "nay, you must forget that.", "ay, let her rot and perish and be damned tonight, for she shall not live. no, my heart is turned to stone. i strike it and it hurts my hand. oh, the world hath not a sweeter creature, she might lie by an emperor's side and command him tasks.", "nay, that's not your way.", "hang her! i do but say what she is. so delicate with her needle, an admirable musician. oh, she will sing the savageness out of a bear! of so high and plenteous wit and invention!", "she's the worse for all this."], ["oh, a thousand thousand times and then of so gentle a condition!", "ay, too gentle.", "nay, that's certain. but yet the pity of it, iago! o iago, the pity of it, iago!", "if you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for if it touch not you it comes near nobody.", "i will chop her into messes! cuckold me?", "oh, 'tis foul in her.", "with mine officer!", "that's fouler.", "get me some poison, iago, this night. i'll not expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again this night, iago!", "do it not with poison. strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath contaminated.", "good, good, the justice of it pleases! very good!", "and for cassio, let me be his undertaker. you shall hear more by midnight.", "excellent good."], ["what trumpet is that same?", "i warrant something from venice. 'tis lodovico, this, comes from the duke. see, your wife's with him.", "save you, worthy general!", "with all my heart, sir.", "the duke and senators of venice greet you.", "i kiss the instrument of their pleasures.", "and what's the news, good cousin lodovico?", "i am very glad to see you, signior. welcome to cyprus.", "i thank you. how does lieutenant cassio?", "lives, sir.", "cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord an unkind breach, but you shall make all well.", "are you sure of that?", "my lord?", "\"this fail you not to do, as you will \""], ["he did not call, he's busy in the paper. is there division 'twixt my lord and cassio?", "a most unhappy one. i would do much t' atone them, for the love i bear to cassio.", "fire and brimstone!", "my lord?", "are you wise?", "what, is he angry?", "maybe the letter moved him, for, as i think, they do command him home, deputing cassio in his government.", "trust me, i am glad on 't.", "indeed!", "my lord?", "i am glad to see you mad.", "why, sweet othello", "devil!", "i have not deserved this."], ["my lord, this would not be believed in venice, though i should swear i saw 't. 'tis very much. make her amends, she weeps.", "oh, devil, devil! if that the earth could teem with woman's tears, each drop she falls would prove a crocodile. out of my sight!", "i will not stay to offend you.", "truly, an obedient lady. i do beseech your lordship, call her back.", "mistress!", "my lord?", "what would you with her, sir?", "who, i, my lord?", "ay, you did wish that i would make her turn. sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on, and turn again. and she can weep, sir, weep. and she's obedient, as you say, obedient, very obedient. proceed you in your tears. concerning this, sir oh, well-painted passion! i am commanded home. get you away, i'll send for you anon. sir, i obey the mandate and will return to venice. hence, avaunt!"], ["cassio shall have my place. and, sir, tonight i do entreat that we may sup together. you are welcome, sir, to cyprus. goats and monkeys!", "is this the noble moor whom our full senate call all in all sufficient? is this the nature whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue the shot of accident nor dart of chance could neither graze nor pierce?", "he is much changed.", "are his wits safe? is he not light of brain?", "he's that he is. i may not breathe my censure what he might be. if what he might he is not, i would to heaven he were!", "what? strike his wife?", "'faith, that was not so well. yet would i knew that stroke would prove the worst!", "is it his use? or did the letters work upon his blood and new-create his fault?"], ["alas, alas! it is not honesty in me to speak what i have seen and known. you shall observe him, and his own courses will denote him so that i may save my speech. do but go after and mark how he continues.", "i am sorry that i am deceived in him."], ["you have seen nothing then?", "nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.", "yes, you have seen cassio and she together.", "but then i saw no harm, and then i heard each syllable that breath made up between them.", "what, did they never whisper?", "never, my lord.", "nor send you out o' th' way?", "never.", "to fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?", "never, my lord.", "that's strange.", "i durst, my lord, to wager she is honest, lay down my soul at stake. if you think other remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom. if any wretch have put this in your head let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse for if she be not honest, chaste, and true there's no man happy. the purest of their wives is foul as slander."], ["bid her come hither. go.", "she says enough, yet she's a simple bawd that cannot say as much. this is a subtle whore, a closet, lock and key, of villainous secrets. and yet she'll kneel and pray, i have seen her do 't.", "my lord, what is your will?", "pray, chuck, come hither.", "what is your pleasure?", "let me see your eyes. look in my face.", "what horrible fancy's this?", "emilia some of your function, mistress, leave procreants alone and shut the door. cough or cry \"hem\" if any body come. your mystery, your mystery! nay, dispatch!", "upon my knee, what doth your speech import? i understand a fury in your words, but not the words.", "why, what art thou?"], ["your wife, my lord. your true and loyal wife.", "come, swear it, damn thyself. lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves should fear to seize thee. therefore be double damned, swear thou art honest!", "heaven doth truly know it.", "heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.", "to whom, my lord? with whom? how am i false?", "ah, desdemona, away, away, away!", "alas the heavy day, why do you weep? am i the motive of these tears, my lord? if haply you my father do suspect an instrument of this your calling back, lay not your blame on me. if you have lost him, why, i have lost him too.", "had it pleased heaven to try me with affliction, had they rained all kinds of sores and shames on my bare head, steeped me in poverty to the very lips, given to captivity me and my utmost hopes, i should have found in some place of my soul a drop of patience. but, alas, to make me"], ["the fixd figure for the time of scorn to point his slow and moving finger at! yet could i bear that too, well, very well. but there where i have garnered up my heart, where either i must live or bear no life, the fountain from the which my current runs or else dries up to be discarded thence! or keep it as a cistern for foul toads to knot and gender in! turn thy complexion there, patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin, ay, there, look grim as hell!", "i hope my noble lord esteems me honest.", "oh, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles, that quicken even with blowing. o thou weed, who art so lovely fair and smell'st so sweet that the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been born!", "alas, what ignorant sin have i committed?", "was this fair paper, this most goodly book, made to write \"whore\" upon? what committed? committed? o thou public commoner! i should make very forges of my cheeks that would to cinders burn up modesty did i but speak thy deeds. what committed? heaven stops the nose at it and the moon winks, the bawdy wind that kisses all it meets is hushed within the hollow mine of earth and will not hear 't. what committed! impudent strumpet!", "by heaven, you do me wrong!"], ["are you not a strumpet?", "no, as i am a christian. if to preserve this vessel for my lord from any other foul unlawful touch be not to be a strumpet, i am none.", "what, not a whore?", "no, as i shall be saved.", "is 't possible?", "oh, heaven forgive us!", "i cry you mercy, then, i took you for that cunning whore of venice that married with othello. you, mistress, that have the office opposite to saint peter and keep the gate of hell!", "you, you, ay, you! we have done our course. there's money for your pains. i pray you, turn the key and keep our counsel.", "alas, what does this gentleman conceive? how do you, madam? how do you, my good lady?", "faith, half asleep.", "good madam, what's the matter with my lord?"], ["with who?", "why, with my lord, madam.", "who is thy lord?", "he that is yours, sweet lady.", "i have none. do not talk to me, emilia. i cannot weep, nor answers have i none, but what should go by water. prithee, tonight lay on my bed my wedding sheets. remember, and call thy husband hither.", "here's a change indeed!", "'tis meet i should be used so, very meet. how have i been behaved that he might stick the small'st opinion on my least misuse?", "what is your pleasure, madam? how is 't with you?", "i cannot tell. those that do teach young babes do it with gentle means and easy tasks. he might have chid me so, for, in good faith, i am a child to chiding.", "what is the matter, lady?"], ["alas, iago, my lord hath so bewhored her, thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her, that true hearts cannot bear it.", "am i that name, iago?", "what name, fair lady?", "such as she says my lord did say i was.", "he called her \"whore.\" a beggar in his drink could not have laid such terms upon his callet.", "why did he so?", "i do not know. i am sure i am none such.", "do not weep, do not weep. alas the day!", "hath she forsook so many noble matches, her father and her country, and her friends, to be called \"whore\"? would it not make one weep?", "it is my wretched fortune.", "beshrew him for 't! how comes this trick upon him?", "nay, heaven doth know.", "i will be hanged, if some eternal villain, some busy and insinuating rogue, some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office, have not devised this slander. i will be hanged else!"], ["fie, there is no such man. it is impossible.", "if any such there be, heaven pardon him!", "a halter pardon him and hell gnaw his bones! why should he call her \"whore\"? who keeps her company? what place? what time? what form? what likelihood? the moor's abused by some most villainous knave, some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow. o heavens, that such companions thou'dst unfold, and put in every honest hand a whip to lash the rascals naked through the world even from the east to th' west!", "speak within door.", "oh, fie upon them! some such squire he was that turned your wit the seamy side without and made you to suspect me with the moor.", "you are a fool. go to.", "alas iago, what shall i do to win my lord again? good friend, go to him. for, by this light of heaven, i know not how i lost him. here i kneel: if e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love, either in discourse of thought or actual deed, or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense, delighted them, or any other form, or that i do not yet, and ever did,"], ["and ever will though he do shake me off to beggarly divorcement love him dearly, comfort forswear me! unkindness may do much, and his unkindness may defeat my life, but never taint my love. i cannot say \"whore,\" it does abhor me now i speak the word. to do the act that might the addition earn not the world's mass of vanity could make me.", "i pray you, be content, 'tis but his humor. the business of the state does him offence, and he does chide with you.", "if 'twere no other", "'tis but so, i warrant.", "hark, how these instruments summon to supper. the messengers of venice stays the meat. go in, and weep not. all things shall be well.", "how now, roderigo!", "i do not find that thou deal'st justly with me.", "what in the contrary?", "every day thou daff'st me with some device, iago, and rather, as it seems to me now, keep'st from me all conveniency than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope."], ["i will indeed no longer endure it, nor am i yet persuaded to put up in peace what already i have foolishly suffered.", "will you hear me, roderigo?", "i have heard too much, and your words and performances are no kin together.", "you charge me most unjustly.", "with naught but truth. i have wasted myself out of my means. the jewels you have had from me to deliver desdemona would half have corrupted a votaress. you have told me she hath received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but i find none.", "well, go to. very well.", "\"very well,\" \"go to\"! i cannot go to, man, nor 'tis not very well. nay, i think it is scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.", "very well.", "i tell you 'tis not very well. i will make myself known to desdemona. if she will return me my jewels i will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation. if not, assure yourself i will seek satisfaction of you.", "you have said now.", "ay, and said nothing but what i protest intendment of doing."], ["why, now i see there's mettle in thee, and even from this instant to build on thee a better opinion than ever before. give me thy hand, roderigo. thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet i protest i have dealt most directly in thy affair.", "it hath not appeared.", "i grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicion is not without wit and judgment. but, roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed, which i have greater reason to believe now than ever i mean purpose, courage and valor this night show it. if thou the next night following enjoy not desdemona, take me from this world with treachery and devise engines for my life.", "well, what is it? is it within reason and compass?", "sir, there is especial commission come from venice to depute cassio in othello's place.", "is that true? why, then othello and desdemona return again to venice.", "oh, no, he goes into mauritania and taketh away with him the fair desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some accident wherein none can be so determinate as the removing of cassio.", "how do you mean, removing of him?", "why, by making him uncapable of othello's place: knocking out his brains.", "and that you would have me to do!"], ["ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. he sups tonight with a harlotry, and thither will i go to him. he knows not yet of his honorable fortune. if you will watch his going thence (which i will fashion to fall out between twelve and one) you may take him at your pleasure. i will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall between us. come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me. i will show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put it on him. it is now high suppertime, and the night grows to waste. about it!", "i will hear further reason for this.", "and you shall be satisfied."], ["i do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.", "oh, pardon me, 'twill do me good to walk.", "madam, good night. i humbly thank your ladyship.", "your honor is most welcome.", "will you walk, sir? o desdemona", "my lord?", "get you to bed on th' instant, i will be returned forthwith. dismiss your attendant there, look 't be done.", "i will, my lord.", "how goes it now? he looks gentler than he did.", "he says he will return incontinent, and hath commanded me to go to bed and bid me to dismiss you.", "dismiss me?", "it was his bidding. therefore, good emilia, give me my nightly wearing, and adieu. we must not now displease him."], ["ay. would you had never seen him!", "so would not i. my love doth so approve him that even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns prithee, unpin me have grace and favor.", "i have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.", "all's one. good father, how foolish are our minds! if i do die before thee, prithee, shroud me in one of these same sheets.", "come, come! you talk!", "my mother had a maid called barbary, she was in love, and he she loved proved mad and did forsake her. she had a song of \"willow,\" an old thing 'twas, but it expressed her fortune and she died singing it. that song tonight will not go from my mind. i have much to do but to go hang my head all at one side and sing it like poor barbary. prithee, dispatch.", "shall i go fetch your nightgown?", "no, unpin me here. this lodovico is a proper man.", "a very handsome man.", "he speaks well.", "i know a lady in venice would have walked barefoot to palestine for a touch of his nether lip."], ["nay, that's not next hark! who is 't that knocks?", "it's the wind.", "if i court more women you'll couch with more men so, get thee gone, good night. mine eyes do itch, doth that bode weeping?", "'tis neither here nor there.", "i have heard it said so. oh, these men, these men! dost thou in conscience think tell me, emilia that there be women do abuse their husbands in such gross kind?", "there be some such, no question."], ["wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?", "why, would not you?", "no, by this heavenly light!", "nor i neither, by this heavenly light. i might do 't as well i' th' dark.", "wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?", "the world's a huge thing. it is a great price for a small vice.", "in troth, i think thou wouldst not.", "in troth, i think i should, and undo 't when i had done. marry, i would not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition. but for the whole world? why, who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch? i should venture purgatory for 't.", "beshrew me, if i would do such a wrong for the whole world.", "why the wrong is but a wrong i' th' world, and having the world for your labor, 'tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right.", "i do not think there is any such woman.", "yes, a dozen, and as many to th' vantage as would store the world they played for. but i do think it is their husbands' faults if wives do fall. say that they slack their duties"], ["and pour our treasures into foreign laps, or else break out in peevish jealousies, throwing restraint upon us. or say they strike us, or scant our former having in despite. why, we have galls, and though we have some grace, yet have we some revenge. let husbands know their wives have sense like them. they see and smell and have their palates both for sweet and sour, as husbands have. what is it that they do when they change us for others? is it sport? i think it is. and doth affection breed it? i think it doth. is 't frailty that thus errs? it is so too. and have not we affections, desires for sport, and frailty, as men have? then let them use us well, else let them know, the ills we do, their ills instruct us so.", "good night, good night. heaven me such uses send, not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!"], ["here, stand behind this bulk, straight will he come. wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home. quick, quick! fear nothing. i'll be at thy elbow. it makes us, or it mars us. think on that, and fix most firm thy resolution.", "be near at hand, i may miscarry in 't.", "here, at thy hand. be bold, and take thy stand.", "i have no great devotion to the deed and yet he hath given me satisfying reasons. 'tis but a man gone. forth, my sword: he dies.", "i have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense, and he grows angry. now, whether he kill cassio or cassio him, or each do kill the other, every way makes my gain. live roderigo, he calls me to a restitution large of gold and jewels that i bobbed from him as gifts to desdemona. it must not be. if cassio do remain he hath a daily beauty in his life that makes me ugly. and besides, the moor may unfold me to him there stand i in much peril. no, he must die. but so, i hear him coming."], ["i know his gait, 'tis he. villain, thou diest!", "that thrust had been mine enemy indeed but that my coat is better than thou know'st i will make proof of thine.", "oh, i am slain!", "i am maimed for ever. help, ho! murder! murder!", "the voice of cassio. iago keeps his word.", "oh, villain that i am!", "it is even so.", "oh, help, ho! light! a surgeon!", "'tis he. oh, brave iago, honest and just, that hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong!"], ["thou teachest me. minion, your dear lies dead, and your unblest fate hies. strumpet, i come. for, of my heart, those charms, thine eyes, are blotted. thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust's blood be spotted.", "what, ho! no watch? no passage? murder! murder!", "'tis some mischance, the cry is very direful.", "oh, help!", "hark!", "oh, wretched villain!", "two or three groan. 'tis heavy night, these may be counterfeits. let's think 't unsafe to come in to the cry without more help.", "nobody come? then shall i bleed to death.", "hark!", "here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.", "who's there? whose noise is this that ones on murder?"], ["we do not know.", "do not you hear a cry?", "here, here! for heaven's sake, help me!", "what's the matter?", "lodovico this is othello's ancient, as i take it.", "the same indeed, a very valiant fellow.", "cassio what are you here that cry so grievously?", "iago? oh, i am spoiled, undone by villains! give me some help.", "oh, me, lieutenant! what villains have done this?", "i think that one of them is hereabout, and cannot make away.", "oh, treacherous villains! lodovico gratiano what are you there? come in, and give some help.", "oh, help me there!", "that's one of them.", "o murd'rous slave! o villain!"], ["o damned iago! o inhuman dog!", "kill men i' th' dark! where be these bloody thieves? how silent is this town! ho! murder! murder! what may you be? are you of good or evil?", "as you shall prove us, praise us.", "signior lodovico?", "he, sir.", "i cry you mercy. here's cassio hurt by villains.", "cassio!", "how is 't, brother!", "my leg is cut in two.", "marry, heaven forbid! light, gentlemen, i'll bind it with my shirt.", "what is the matter, ho? who is 't that cried?", "who is 't that cried?", "oh, my dear cassio! my sweet cassio! o cassio, cassio, cassio!", "o notable strumpet! cassio, may you suspect who they should be that have thus mangled you?"], ["no.", "i am sorry to find you thus. i have been to seek you.", "lend me a garter. so. oh, for a chair, to bear him easily hence!", "alas, he faints! o cassio, cassio, cassio!", "gentlemen all, i do suspect this trash to be a party in this injury. patience awhile, good cassio. come, come, lend me a light. know we this face or no? alas, my friend and my dear countryman roderigo! no yes, sure! yes, 'tis roderigo.", "what, of venice?", "even he, sir. did you know him?", "know him? ay.", "signior gratiano? i cry you gentle pardon, these bloody accidents must excuse my manners that so neglected you.", "i am glad to see you.", "how do you, cassio? oh, a chair, a chair!", "roderigo!", "he, he, 'tis he."], ["oh, that's well said the chair! some good man bear him carefully from hence. i'll fetch the general's surgeon. bianca for you, mistress, save you your labor. he that lies slain here, cassio, was my dear friend. what malice was between you?", "none in the world, nor do i know the man.", "bianca what, look you pale? oh, bear him out o' the air.", "do you perceive the gastness of her eye? stay you, good gentlemen. look you pale, mistress? nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon. behold her well. i pray you, look upon her. do you see, gentlemen? nay, guiltiness will speak, though tongues were out of use.", "alas, what is the matter? what is the matter, husband?", "cassio hath here been set on in the dark by roderigo and fellows that are 'scaped. he's almost slain, and roderigo dead.", "alas, good gentleman! alas, good cassio!", "this is the fruits of whoring. prithee, emilia, go know of cassio where he supped tonight. bianca what, do you shake at that?"], ["he supped at my house, but i therefore shake not.", "oh, did he so? i charge you, go with me.", "oh, fie upon thee, strumpet!", "i am no strumpet, but of life as honest as you that thus abuse me.", "as i! fie upon thee!", "kind gentlemen, let's go see poor cassio dressed. come, mistress, you must tell 's another tale. emilia, run you to the citadel and tell my lord and lady what hath happed. will you go on afore? this is the night that either makes me or fordoes me quite."], ["it is the cause, it is the cause, my soul. let me not name it to you, you chaste stars, it is the cause. yet i'll not shed her blood, nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow and smooth as monumental alabaster. yet she must die, else she'll betray more men. put out the light, and then put out the light. if i quench thee, thou flaming minister, i can again thy former light restore should i repent me. but once put out thy light, thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature, i know not where is that promethean heat that can thy light relume. when i have plucked thy rose i cannot give it vital growth again, it must needs wither. i'll smell thee on the tree. oh, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade justice to break her sword! one more, one more. be thus when thou art dead and i will kill thee and love thee after. one more, and that's the last. so sweet was ne'er so fatal. i must weep, but they are cruel tears. this sorrow's heavenly, it strikes where it doth love. she wakes.", "who's there? othello?", "ay, desdemona."], ["will you come to bed, my lord?", "have you prayed tonight, desdemon?", "ay, my lord.", "if you bethink yourself of any crime unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace, solicit for it straight.", "alack, my lord, what do you mean by that?", "well, do it, and be brief. i will walk by. i would not kill thy unprepard spirit. no, heavens forfend, i would not kill thy soul!", "talk you of killing?", "ay, i do.", "then heaven have mercy on me!", "amen, with all my heart.", "if you say, i hope you will not kill me.", "humh!", "and yet i fear you, for you're fatal then when your eyes roll so. why i should fear i know not, since guiltiness i know not. but yet i feel i fear.", "think on thy sins."], ["they are loves i bear to you.", "ay, and for that thou diest.", "that death's unnatural that kills for loving. alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip? some bloody passion shakes your very frame. these are portents, but yet i hope, i hope they do not point on me.", "peace, and be still.", "i will so. what's the matter?", "that handkerchief which i so loved and gave thee, thou gav'st to cassio.", "no, by my life and soul! send for the man and ask him.", "sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury. thou art on thy deathbed.", "ay but not yet to die!", "presently. therefore confess thee freely of thy sin, for to deny each article with oath cannot remove nor choke the strong conception that i do groan withal. thou art to die.", "oh, heaven have mercy on me!", "i say \"amen.\""], ["and have you mercy too! i never did offend you in my life, never loved cassio but with such general warranty of heaven as i might love. i never gave him token.", "by heaven, i saw my handkerchief in 's hand. o perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart, and mak'st me call what i intend to do a murder, which i thought a sacrifice! i saw the handkerchief.", "he found it then, i never gave it him. send for him hither, let him confess a truth.", "he hath confessed.", "what, my lord?", "that he hath usd thee.", "how? unlawfully?", "ay.", "he will not say so.", "no, his mouth is stopped. honest iago hath ta'en order for 't.", "oh! my fear interprets. what, is he dead?", "had all his hairs been lives my great revenge had stomach for them all."], ["alas, he is betrayed and i undone.", "out, strumpet! weep'st thou for him to my face?", "oh, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!", "down, strumpet!", "kill me tomorrow let me live tonight!", "nay, if you strive", "but half an hour!", "being done, there is no pause.", "but while i say one prayer!", "it is too late.", "my lord , my lord! what, ho! my lord, my lord!", "what noise is this? not dead? not yet quite dead? i that am cruel am yet merciful, i would not have thee linger in thy pain. so, so.", "what, ho! my lord, my lord!", "who's there?", "o good my lord, i would speak a word with you!"], ["yes, 'tis emilia. emilia by and by. she's dead. 'tis like she comes to speak of cassio's death, the noise was high. ha! no more moving? still as the grave. shall she come in? were 't good? i think she stirs again no. what's best to do? if she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife my wife! my wife! what wife? i have no wife. oh, insupportable! oh, heavy hour! methinks it should be now a huge eclipse of sun and moon, and that th' affrighted globe should yawn at alteration.", "i do beseech you that i may speak with you, o good my lord!", "i had forgot thee oh, come in, emilia. soft, by and by. let me the curtains draw. where art thou?", "what's the matter with thee now?", "o my good lord, yonder's foul murders done!", "what, now?", "but now, my lord.", "it is the very error of the moon, she comes more nearer earth than she was wont and makes men mad.", "cassio, my lord, hath killed a young venetian called roderigo."], ["roderigo killed? and cassio killed!", "no, cassio is not killed.", "not cassio killed! then murder's out of tune, and sweet revenge grows harsh.", "oh, falsely, falsely murdered!", "alas, what cry is that?", "that? what?", "out and alas, that was my lady's voice.", "help! help, ho, help! o lady, speak again! sweet desdemona! o sweet mistress, speak!", "a guiltless death i die.", "oh, who hath done this deed?", "nobody. i myself. farewell. commend me to my kind lord. oh, farewell!", "why, how should she be murdered?", "alas, who knows?", "you heard her say herself it was not i."], ["she said so. i must needs report the truth.", "she's like a liar gone to burning hell. 'twas i that killed her.", "oh, the more angel she, and you the blacker devil!", "she turned to folly, and she was a whore.", "thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.", "she was false as water.", "thou art rash as fire, to say that she was false. oh, she was heavenly true!", "cassio did top her, ask thy husband else. oh, i were damned beneath all depth in hell, but that i did proceed upon just grounds to this extremity. thy husband knew it all.", "my husband!", "thy husband.", "that she was false to wedlock?", "ay, with cassio. had she been true, if heaven would make me such another world of one entire and perfect chrysolite, i'd not have sold her for it.", "my husband?"], ["ay, 'twas he that told me on her first. an honest man he is, and hates the slime that sticks on filthy deeds.", "my husband!", "what needs this iterance, woman? i say thy husband.", "o mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love! my husband say that she was false!", "he, woman. i say \"thy husband\" dost understand the word? my friend, thy husband, honest, honest iago.", "if he say so, may his pernicious soul rot half a grain a day! he lies to th' heart. she was too fond of her most filthy bargain.", "ha!", "do thy worst. this deed of thine is no more worthy heaven than thou wast worthy her.", "peace, you were best.", "thou hast not half that power to do me harm as i have to be hurt. o gull! o dolt! as ignorant as dirt! thou hast done a deed i care not for thy sword, i'll make thee known"], ["though i lost twenty lives. help! help, ho! help! the moor hath killed my mistress! murder, murder!", "what is the matter? how now, general?", "oh, are you come, iago? you have done well, that men must lay their murders on your neck.", "what is the matter?", "iago disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man. he says thou told'st him that his wife was false. i know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain. speak, for my heart is full.", "i told him what i thought, and told no more than what he found himself was apt and true.", "but did you ever tell him she was false?", "i did.", "you told a lie, an odious, damnd lie. upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie. she false with cassio! did you say with cassio?", "with cassio, mistress. go to, charm your tongue.", "i will not charm my tongue, i am bound to speak. my mistress here lies murdered in her bed", "oh, heavens forfend!"], ["and your reports have set the murder on.", "nay, stare not, masters, it is true, indeed.", "'tis a strange truth.", "oh, monstrous act!", "villainy, villainy, villainy! i think upon 't, i think i smell 't, oh, villainy! i thought so then, i'll kill myself for grief. oh, villainy, villainy!", "what, are you mad? i charge you, get you home.", "good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak. 'tis proper i obey him, but not now. perchance, iago, i will ne'er go home.", "oh! oh! oh!", "nay, lay thee down and roar, for thou hast killed the sweetest innocent that e'er did lift up eye.", "oh, she was foul! i scarce did know you, uncle. there lies your niece, whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopped. i know this act shows horrible and grim.", "poor desdemon! i am glad thy father's dead, thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief shore his old thread in twain. did he live now,"], ["this sight would make him do a desperate turn, yea, curse his better angel from his side and fall to reprobation.", "'tis pitiful, but yet iago knows that she with cassio hath the act of shame a thousand times committed. cassio confessed it, and she did gratify his amorous works with that recognizance and pledge of love which i first gave her. i saw it in his hand, it was a handkerchief, an antique token my father gave my mother.", "oh, heaven! oh, heavenly powers!", "zounds, hold your peace.", "'twill out, 'twill out. i peace? no, i will speak as liberal as the north. let heaven and men and devils, let them all, all, all cry shame against me, yet i'll speak.", "be wise, and get you home.", "i will not.", "fie! your sword upon a woman?", "o thou dull moor! that handkerchief thou speak'st of i found by fortune and did give my husband. for often, with a solemn earnestness more than indeed belonged to such a trifle he begged of me to steal it."], ["villainous whore!", "she give it cassio? no, alas, i found it and i did give 't my husband.", "filth, thou liest!", "by heaven, i do not, i do not, gentlemen. othello o murderous coxcomb! what should such a fool do with so good a wife?", "are there no stones in heaven but what serve for the thunder? precious villain!", "the woman falls! sure he hath killed his wife.", "ay, ay. oh, lay me by my mistress' side.", "he's gone, but his wife's killed.", "'tis a notorious villain. take you this weapon, which i have recovered from the moor. come, guard the door without. let him not pass, but kill him rather. i'll after that same villain, for 'tis a damnd slave."], ["i am not valiant neither, but ever puny whipster gets my sword. but why should honor outlive honesty? let it go all.", "what did thy song bode, lady? hark, canst thou hear me? i will play the swan. and die in music. moor, she was chaste, she loved thee, cruel moor. so come my soul to bliss, as i speak true. so speaking as i think, alas, i die.", "i have another weapon in this chamber, it was a sword of spain, the ice-brook's temper. oh, here it is. uncle, i must come forth.", "if thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear. thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.", "look in upon me then and speak with me, or, naked as i am, i will assault thee.", "what is the matter?", "behold, i have a weapon. a better never did itself sustain upon a soldier's thigh. i have seen the day"], ["that with this little arm and this good sword i have made my way through more impediments than twenty times your stop. but, oh, vain boast! who can control his fate? 'tis not so now. be not afraid, though you do see me weaponed. here is my journey's end, here is my butt, and very sea-mark of my utmost sail. do you go back dismayed? 'tis a lost fear. man but a rush against othello's breast, and he retires. where should othello go? now, how dost thou look now? o ill-starred wench, pale as thy smock! when we shall meet at compt this look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven and fiends will snatch at it. cold, cold, my girl, even like thy chastity. o cursed, cursed slave! whip me, ye devils, from the possession of this heavenly sight! blow me about in winds, roast me in sulfur, wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire! oh, desdemona! desdemona! dead! oh! oh!", "where is this rash and most unfortunate man?", "that's he that was othello. here i am.", "where is that viper? bring the villain forth."], ["i look down towards his feet, but that's a fable. if that thou be'st a devil, i cannot kill thee.", "wrench his sword from him.", "i bleed, sir, but not killed.", "i am not sorry neither. i'd have thee live, for in my sense 'tis happiness to die.", "o thou othello, thou was once so good, fall'n in the practice of a cursd slave, what shall be said to thee?", "why, anything. an honorable murderer, if you will, for naught i did in hate, but all in honor.", "this wretch hath part confessed his villainy. did you and he consent in cassio's death?", "ay.", "dear general, i never gave you cause.", "i do believe it, and i ask your pardon. will you, i pray, demand that demi-devil why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?"], ["demand me nothing. what you know, you know. from this time forth i never will speak word.", "what, not to pray?", "torments will ope your lips.", "well, thou dost best.", "sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n, which, as i think, you know not. here is a letter found in the pocket of the slain roderigo, and here another. the one of them imports the death of cassio to be undertook by roderigo.", "oh, villain!", "most heathenish and most gross!", "now here's another discontented paper found in his pocket too, and this, it seems, roderigo meant to have sent this damnd villain but that, belike, iago in the interim came in and satisfied him.", "o thou pernicious caitiff! how came you, cassio, by that handkerchief that was my wife's?", "i found it in my chamber, and he himself confessed but even now that there he dropped it for a special purpose which wrought to his desire."], ["o fool! fool! fool!", "there is besides in roderigo's letter how he upbraids iago, that he made him brave me upon the watch, whereon it came that i was cast. and even but now he spake, after long seeming dead iago hurt him, iago set him on.", "othello you must forsake this room and go with us. your power and your command is taken off and cassio rules in cyprus. for this slave, if there be any cunning cruelty that can torment him much and hold him long, it shall be his. you shall close prisoner rest till that the nature of your fault be known to the venetian state. come, bring him away.", "soft you, a word or two before you go. i have done the state some service, and they know 't. no more of that. i pray you, in your letters, when you shall these unlucky deeds relate, speak of me as i am. nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice. then must you speak of one that loved not wisely, but too well. of one not easily jealous, but being wrought, perplexed in the extreme. of one whose hand, like the base indian, threw a pearl away richer than all his tribe. of one whose subdued eyes, albeit unused to the melting mood, drop tears as fast as the arabian trees their medicinal gum. set you down this,"], ["and say besides that in aleppo once, where a malignant and a turbaned turk beat a venetian and traduced the state, i took by the throat the circumcisd dog, and smote him, thus.", "oh, bloody period!", "all that is spoke is marred.", "desdemona i kissed thee ere i killed thee. no way but this, killing myself, to die upon a kiss.", "this did i fear, but thought he had no weapon, for he was great of heart.", "iago o spartan dog, more fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea, look on the tragic loading of this bed. this is thy work. the object poisons sight, let it be hid. gratiano, keep the house and seize upon the fortunes of the moor, for they succeed on you. to you, lord governor, remains the censure of this hellish villain: the time, the place, the torture. oh, enforce it! myself will straight aboard, and to the state this heavy act with heavy heart relate."]], [["now is the winter of our discontent made glorious summer by this son of york, and all the clouds that loured upon our house in the deep bosom of the ocean buried. now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths, our bruisd arms hung up for monuments, our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, our dreadful marches to delightful measures. grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front; and now, instead of mounting barbd steeds to fright the souls of fearful adversaries, he capers nimbly in a lady's chamber to the lascivious pleasing of a lute. but i, that am not shaped for sportive tricks, nor made to court an amorous looking glass; i, that am rudely stamped and want love's majesty to strut before a wanton ambling nymph; i, that am curtailed of this fair proportion, cheated of feature by dissembling nature, deformed, unfinished, sent before my time into this breathing world, scarce half made up, and that so lamely and unfashionable that dogs bark at me as i halt by them why, i, in this weak piping time of peace, have no delight to pass away the time, unless to see my shadow in the sun and descant on mine own deformity."], ["and therefore, since i cannot prove a lover to entertain these fair well-spoken days, i am determind to prove a villain and hate the idle pleasures of these days. plots have i laid, inductions dangerous, by drunken prophecies, libels and dreams, to set my brother clarence and the king in deadly hate, the one against the other; and if king edward be as true and just as i am subtle, false, and treacherous, this day should clarence closely be mewed up about a prophecy which says that \"g\" of edward's heirs the murderer shall be. dive, thoughts, down to my soul. here clarence comes.", "brother, good day. what means this armd guard that waits upon your grace?", "his majesty, tend'ring my person's safety, hath appointed this conduct to convey me to the tower.", "upon what cause?", "because my name is george.", "alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours. he should, for that, commit your godfathers. o, belike his majesty hath some intent that you shall be new christened in the tower. but what's the matter, clarence? may i know?"], ["yea, richard, when i know, for i protest as yet i do not. but, as i can learn, he hearkens after prophecies and dreams, and from the crossrow plucks the letter , and says a wizard told him that by \"g\" his issue disinherited should be. and for my name of george begins with , it follows in his thought that i am he. these, as i learn, and such like toys as these have moved his highness to commit me now.", "why, this it is when men are ruled by women. 'tis not the king that sends you to the tower. my lady grey his wife, clarence, 'tis she that tempers him to this extremity. was it not she and that good man of worship, anthony woodeville, her brother there, that made him send lord hastings to the tower, from whence this present day he is delivered? we are not safe, clarence. we are not safe.", "by heaven, i think there is no man is secure but the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds that trudge betwixt the king and mistress shore. heard ye not what an humble suppliant lord hastings was to her for his delivery?", "humbly complaining to her deity got my lord chamberlain his liberty. i'll tell you what: i think it is our way, if we will keep in favor with the king, to be her men and wear her livery. the jealous o'erworn widow and herself, since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen, are mighty gossips in this monarchy."], ["i beseech your graces both to pardon me. his majesty hath straitly given in charge that no man shall have private conference, of what degree soever, with his brother.", "even so. an please your worship, brakenbury, you may partake of anything we say. we speak no treason, man. we say the king is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen well struck in years, fair, and not jealous. we say that shore's wife hath a pretty foot, a cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue, and that the queen's kindred are made gentlefolks. how say you, sir? can you deny all this?", "with this, my lord, myself have naught to do.", "naught to do with mistress shore? i tell thee, fellow, he that doth naught with her, excepting one, were best he do it secretly, alone.", "what one, my lord?", "her husband, knave. wouldst thou betray me?", "i do beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal forbear your conference with the noble duke."], ["we know thy charge, brakenbury, and will obey.", "we are the queen's abjects and must obey. brother, farewell. i will unto the king, and whatsoe'er you will employ me in, were it to call king edward's widow \"sister,\" i will perform it to enfranchise you. meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood touches me deeper than you can imagine.", "i know it pleaseth neither of us well.", "well, your imprisonment shall not be long. i will deliver you or else lie for you. meantime, have patience.", "i must perforce. farewell.", "go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return. simple, plain clarence, i do love thee so that i will shortly send thy soul to heaven, if heaven will take the present at our hands. but who comes here? the new-delivered hastings?", "good time of day unto my gracious lord.", "as much unto my good lord chamberlain. well are you welcome to the open air. how hath your lordship brooked imprisonment?"], ["with patience, noble lord, as prisoners must. but i shall live, my lord, to give them thanks that were the cause of my imprisonment.", "no doubt, no doubt; and so shall clarence too, for they that were your enemies are his and have prevailed as much on him as you.", "more pity that the eagle should be mewed while kites and buzzards prey at liberty.", "what news abroad?", "no news so bad abroad as this at home: the king is sickly, weak and melancholy, and his physicians fear him mightily.", "now, by saint paul, that news is bad indeed. o, he hath kept an evil diet long, and overmuch consumed his royal person. 'tis very grievous to be thought upon. where is he, in his bed?", "he is.", "go you before, and i will follow you."], ["he cannot live, i hope, and must not die till george be packed with post-horse up to heaven. i'll in to urge his hatred more to clarence with lies well steeled with weighty arguments, and, if i fail not in my deep intent, clarence hath not another day to live; which done, god take king edward to his mercy, and leave the world for me to bustle in. for then i'll marry warwick's youngest daughter. what though i killed her husband and her father? the readiest way to make the wench amends is to become her husband and her father; the which will i, not all so much for love as for another secret close intent by marrying her which i must reach unto. but yet i run before my horse to market. clarence still breathes; edward still lives and reigns. when they are gone, then must i count my gains."], ["set down, set down your honorable load, if honor may be shrouded in a hearse, whilst i awhile obsequiously lament th' untimely fall of virtuous lancaster.", "poor key-cold figure of a holy king, pale ashes of the house of lancaster, thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood, be it lawful that i invocate thy ghost to hear the lamentations of poor anne, wife to thy edward, to thy slaughtered son, stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds. lo, in these windows that let forth thy life i pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes. o, cursd be the hand that made these holes; cursd the heart that had the heart to do it; cursd the blood that let this blood from hence. more direful hap betide that hated wretch that makes us wretched by the death of thee than i can wish to wolves, to spiders, toads, or any creeping venomed thing that lives. if ever he have child, abortive be it, prodigious, and untimely brought to light, whose ugly and unnatural aspect may fright the hopeful mother at the view, and that be heir to his unhappiness."], ["if ever he have wife, let her be made more miserable by the death of him than i am made by my poor lord and thee. come now towards chertsey with your holy load, taken from paul's to be interrd there.", "and still, as you are weary of this weight, rest you, whiles i lament king henry's corse.", "stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.", "what black magician conjures up this fiend to stop devoted charitable deeds?", "villains, set down the corse or, by saint paul, i'll make a corse of him that disobeys.", "my lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.", "unmannered dog, stand thou when i command! advance thy halberd higher than my breast, or by saint paul i'll strike thee to my foot and spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness."], ["what, do you tremble? are you all afraid? alas, i blame you not, for you are mortal, and mortal eyes cannot endure the devil. avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell. thou hadst but power over his mortal body; his soul thou canst not have. therefore begone.", "sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.", "foul devil, for god's sake, hence, and trouble us not, for thou hast made the happy earth thy hell, filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims. if thou delight to view thy heinous deeds, behold this pattern of thy butcheries.", "o, gentlemen, see, see dead henry's wounds open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh! blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity, for 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood from cold and empty veins where no blood dwells. thy deeds, inhuman and unnatural, provokes this deluge most unnatural. o god, which this blood mad'st, revenge his death! o earth, which this blood drink'st revenge his death! either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead, or earth gape open wide and eat him quick, as thou dost swallow up this good king's blood, which his hell-governed arm hath butcherd!"], ["lady, you know no rules of charity, which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.", "villain, thou know'st not law of god nor man. no beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.", "but i know none, and therefore am no beast.", "o, wonderful, when devils tell the truth!", "more wonderful, when angels are so angry. vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman, of these supposd crimes to give me leave by circumstance but to acquit myself.", "vouchsafe, defused infection of a man, of these known evils but to give me leave by circumstance to curse thy cursd self.", "fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have some patient leisure to excuse myself.", "fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make no excuse current but to hang thyself.", "by such despair i should accuse myself.", "and by despairing shalt thou stand excused for doing worthy vengeance on thyself that didst unworthy slaughter upon others."], ["say that i slew them not.", "then say they were not slain. but dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.", "i did not kill your husband.", "why then, he is alive.", "nay, he is dead, and slain by edward's hands.", "in thy foul throat thou liest. queen margaret saw thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood, the which thou once didst bend against her breast, but that thy brothers beat aside the point.", "i was provokd by her sland'rous tongue, that laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.", "thou wast provokd by thy bloody mind, that never dream'st on aught but butcheries. didst thou not kill this king?", "i grant you.", "dost grant me, hedgehog? then, god grant me too thou mayst be damnd for that wicked deed. o, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.", "the better for the king of heaven that hath him.", "he is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.", "let him thank me, that holp to send him thither, for he was fitter for that place than earth."], ["and thou unfit for any place but hell.", "yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.", "some dungeon.", "your bedchamber.", "ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!", "so will it, madam till i lie with you.", "i hope so.", "i know so. but, gentle lady anne, to leave this keen encounter of our wits and fall something into a slower method is not the causer of the timeless deaths of these plantagenets, henry and edward, as blameful as the executioner?"], ["thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.", "your beauty was the cause of that effect your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep to undertake the death of all the world, so i might live one hour in your sweet bosom.", "if i thought that, i tell thee, homicide, these nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.", "these eyes could never endure that beauty's wrack. you should not blemish it, if i stood by. as all the world is cheerd by the sun, so i by that. it is my day, my life.", "black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life.", "curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.", "i would i were, to be revenged on thee.", "it is a quarrel most unnatural to be revenged on him that loveth thee.", "it is a quarrel just and reasonable to be revenged on him that killed my husband.", "he that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband did it to help thee to a better husband.", "his better doth not breathe upon the earth."], ["he lives that loves thee better than he could.", "name him.", "plantagenet.", "why, that was he.", "the selfsame name, but one of better nature.", "where is he?", "here.", "why dost thou spit at me?", "would it were mortal poison for thy sake.", "never came poison from so sweet a place.", "never hung poison on a fouler toad. out of my sight! thou dost infect mine eyes.", "thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.", "would they were basilisks to strike thee dead."], ["i would they were, that i might die at once, for now they kill me with a living death. those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears, shamed their aspect with store of childish drops. these eyes, which never shed remorseful tear no, when my father york and edward wept to hear the piteous moan that rutland made when black-faced clifford shook his sword at him; nor when thy warlike father, like a child, told the sad story of my father's death and twenty times made pause to sob and weep, that all the standers-by had wet their cheeks like trees bedashed with rain in that sad time, my manly eyes did scorn an humble tear; and what these sorrows could not thence exhale thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping. i never sued to friend, nor enemy; my tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word. but now thy beauty is proposed my fee, my proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.", "teach not thy lip such scorn, for it were made for kissing, lady, not for such contempt. if thy revengeful heart cannot forgive, lo, here i lend thee this sharp-pointed sword, which if thou please to hide in this true breast and let the soul forth that adoreth thee, i lay it naked to the deadly stroke and humbly beg the death upon my knee.", "nay, do not pause; for i did kill king henry but 'twas thy beauty that provokd me. nay, now dispatch; 'twas i that stabbed young edward but 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on."], ["take up the sword again, or take up me.", "arise, dissembler. though i wish thy death, i will not be the executioner.", "then bid me kill myself, and i will do it.", "i have already.", "that was in thy rage. speak it again and, even with the word, this hand, which for thy love did kill thy love, shall for thy love kill a far truer love. to both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.", "i would i knew thy heart.", "'tis figured in my tongue.", "i fear me both are false.", "then never man was man true.", "well, well, put up your sword.", "say then my peace is made.", "that shall you know hereafter."], ["but shall i live in hope?", "all men i hope live so.", "vouchsafe to wear this ring.", "to take is not to give.", "look, how this ring encompasseth finger; even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart. wear both of them, for both of them are thine. and if thy poor devoted servant may but beg one favor at thy gracious hand, thou dost confirm his happiness forever.", "what is it?", "that it would please you leave these sad designs to him that hath more cause to be a mourner, and presently repair to crosby house, where, after i have solemnly interred at chertsey monast'ry this noble king and wet his grave with my repentant tears, i will with all expedient duty see you. for divers unknown reasons, i beseech you, grant me this boon.", "with all my heart, and much it joys me too to see you are become so penitent. tressel and berkeley, go along with me.", "bid me farewell."], ["'tis more than you deserve; but since you teach me how to flatter you, imagine i have said \"farewell\" already.", "sirs, take up the corse.", "towards chertsey, noble lord?", "no, to whitefriars. there attend my coming.", "was ever woman in this humor wooed? was ever woman in this humor won? i'll have her, but i will not keep her long. what, i that killed her husband and his father, to take her in her heart's extremest hate, with curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes, the bleeding witness of my hatred by, having god, her conscience, and these bars against me, and i no friends to back my suit at all but the plain devil and dissembling looks? and yet to win her, all the world to nothing! ha! hath she forgot already that brave prince, edward, her lord, whom i some three months since stabbed in my angry mood at tewkesbury? a sweeter and a lovellier gentleman, framed in the prodigality of nature, young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal, the spacious world cannot again afford."], ["and will she yet abase her eyes on me, that cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince and made her widow to a woeful bed? on me, whose all not equals edward's moiety? on me, that halts and am misshapen thus? my dukedom to a beggarly denier, i do mistake my person all this while! upon my life, she finds, although i cannot, myself to be a marv'lous proper man. i'll be at charges for a looking glass and entertain a score or two of tailors to study fashions to adorn my body. since i am crept in favor with myself, i will maintain it with some little cost. but first i'll turn yon fellow in his grave and then return lamenting to my love. shine out, fair sun, till i have bought a glass, that i may see my shadow as i pass."], ["have patience, madam. there's no doubt his majesty will soon recover his accustomed health.", "in that you brook it ill, it makes him worse. therefore, for god's sake, entertain good comfort and cheer his grace with quick and merry eyes.", "if he were dead, what would betide on me?", "no other harm but loss of such a lord.", "the loss of such a lord includes all harms.", "the heavens have blessed you with a goodly son to be your comforter when he is gone.", "ah, he is young, and his minority is put unto the trust of richard gloucester, a man that loves not me nor none of you.", "is it concluded that he shall be protector?", "it is determined, not concluded yet; but so it must be if the king miscarry."], ["here comes the lord of buckingham, and derby.", "queen elizabeth good time of day unto your royal grace.", "god make your majesty joyful, as you have been.", "the countess richmond, good my lord of derby, to your good prayer will scarcely say amen. yet, derby, notwithstanding she's your wife and loves not me, be you, good lord, assured i hate not you for her proud arrogance.", "i do beseech you either not believe the envious slanders of her false accusers, or if she be accused in true report, bear with her weakness, which i think proceeds from wayward sickness and no grounded malice.", "saw you the king today, my lord of derby?", "but now the duke of buckingham and i are come from visiting his majesty.", "what likelihood of his amendment, lords?", "madam, good hope. his grace speaks cheerfully."], ["god grant him health. did you confer with him?", "ay, madam. he desires to make atonement betwixt the duke of gloucester and your brothers, and betwixt them and my lord chamberlain, and sent to warn them to his royal presence.", "would all were well but that will never be. i fear our happiness is at the height.", "they do me wrong, and i will not endure it! who is it that complains unto the king that i, forsooth, am stern and love them not? by holy paul, they love his grace but lightly that fill his ears with such dissentious rumors. because i cannot flatter and look fair, smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog, duck with french nods and apish courtesy, i must be held a rancorous enemy. cannot a plain man live and think no harm, but thus his simple truth must be abused with silken, sly, insinuating jacks?", "to whom in all this presence speaks your grace?", "to thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace. when have i injured thee? when done thee wrong? or thee? or thee? or any of your faction? a plague upon you all! his royal grace, whom god preserve better than you would wish, cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while but you must trouble him with lewd complaints."], ["brother of gloucester, you mistake the matter. the king, on his own royal disposition, and not provoked by any suitor else, aiming belike at your interior hatred that in your outward actions shows itself against my children, brothers, and myself, makes him to send, that he may learn the ground.", "i cannot tell. the world is grown so bad that wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch. since every jack became a gentleman, there's many a gentle person made a jack.", "come, come, we know your meaning, brother gloucester. you envy my advancement, and my friends'. god grant we never may have need of you.", "meantime god grants that we have need of you. our brother is imprisoned by your means, myself disgraced, and the nobility held in contempt, while great promotions are daily given to ennoble those that scarce some two days since were worth a noble.", "by him that raised me to this careful height from that contented hap which i enjoyed, i never did incense his majesty against the duke of clarence, but have been an earnest advocate to plead for him. my lord, you do me shameful injury falsely to draw me in these vile suspects."], ["you may deny that you were not the mean of my lord hastings' late imprisonment.", "she may, my lord, for", "she may, lord rivers. why, who knows not so? she may do more, sir, than denying that. she may help you to many fair preferments and then deny her aiding hand therein, and lay those honors on your high desert. what may she not? she may, ay, marry, may she", "what, marry, may she?", "what, marry, may she? marry with a king, a bachelor, a handsome stripling too. i wis, your grandam had a worser match.", "my lord of gloucester, i have too long borne your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs. by heaven, i will acquaint his majesty with those gross taunts that oft i have endured. i had rather be a country servant-maid than a great queen with this condition, to be so baited, scorned, and stormd at.", "small joy have i in being england's queen.", "and lessened be that small, god i beseech him! thy honor, state, and seat is due to me."], ["queen elizabeth what, threat you me with telling of the king? tell him, and spare not. look, what i have said, i will avouch 't in presence of the king; i dare adventure to be sent to th' tower. 'tis time to speak. my pains are quite forgot.", "out, devil! i do remember them too well: thou killed'st my husband henry in the tower, and edward, my poor son, at tewkesbury.", "queen elizabeth ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king, i was a packhorse in his great affairs, a weeder-out of his proud adversaries, a liberal rewarder of his friends. to royalize his blood, i spent mine own.", "ay, and much better blood than his or thine.", "queen elizabeth in all which time, you and your husband grey were factious for the house of lancaster. and, rivers, so were you. was not your husband in margaret's battle at saint albans slain? let me put in your minds, if you forget, what you have been ere this, and what you are; withal, what i have been, and what i am.", "a murd'rous villain, and so still thou art."], ["queen elizabeth poor clarence did forsake his father warwick, ay, and forswore himself which jesu pardon!", "which god revenge!", "to fight on edward's party for the crown; and for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up. i would to god my heart were flint, like edward's, or edward's soft and pitiful, like mine. i am too childish-foolish for this world.", "hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world, thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is.", "my lord of gloucester, in those busy days which here you urge to prove us enemies, we followed then our lord, our sovereign king. so should we you, if you should be our king.", "if i should be? i had rather be a peddler. far be it from my heart, the thought thereof.", "as little joy, my lord, as you suppose you should enjoy were you this country's king, as little joy may you suppose in me that i enjoy, being the queen thereof."], ["as little joy enjoys the queen thereof, for i am she, and altogether joyless. i can no longer hold me patient.", "hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out in sharing that which you have pilled from me! which of you trembles not that looks on me? if not, that i am queen, you bow like subjects, yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels. ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.", "foul, wrinkled witch, what mak'st thou in my sight?", "but repetition of what thou hast marred. that will i make before i let thee go.", "wert thou not banishd on pain of death?", "i was, but i do find more pain in banishment than death can yield me here by my abode. a husband and a son thou ow'st to me; queen elizabeth and thou a kingdom; all of you, allegiance. the sorrow that i have by right is yours, and all the pleasures you usurp are mine.", "the curse my noble father laid on thee when thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper, and with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes, and then, to dry them, gav'st the duke a clout steeped in the faultless blood of pretty rutland his curses then, from bitterness of soul denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee, and god, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed."], ["so just is god to right the innocent.", "o, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe, and the most merciless that e'er was heard of!", "tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.", "no man but prophesied revenge for it.", "northumberland, then present, wept to see it.", "what, were you snarling all before i came, ready to catch each other by the throat, and turn you all your hatred now on me? did york's dread curse prevail so much with heaven that henry's death, my lovelly edward's death, their kingdom's loss, my woeful banishment, could all but answer for that peevish brat? can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven? why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses! though not by war, by surfeit die your king, as ours by murder to make him a king."], ["queen elizabeth edward thy son, that now is prince of wales, for edward our son, that was prince of wales, die in his youth by like untimely violence. thyself a queen, for me that was a queen, outlive thy glory, like my wretched self. long mayst thou live to wail thy children's death and see another, as i see thee now, decked in thy rights, as thou art stalled in mine. long die thy happy days before thy death, and, after many lengthened hours of grief, die neither mother, wife, nor england's queen. rivers and dorset, you were standers-by, and so wast thou, lord hastings, when my son was stabbed with bloody daggers. god i pray him that none of you may live his natural age, but by some unlooked accident cut off.", "have done thy charm, thou hateful, withered hag.", "and leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me. if heaven have any grievous plague in store exceeding those that i can wish upon thee, o, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe and then hurl down their indignation on thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace. the worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul. thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv'st, and take deep traitors for thy dearest friends. no sleep close up that deadly eye of thine, unless it be while some tormenting dream affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils."], ["thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog, thou that wast sealed in thy nativity the slave of nature and the son of hell, thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb, thou loathd issue of thy father's loins, thou rag of honor, thou detested", "margaret.", "richard!", "ha?", "i call thee not.", "i cry thee mercy, then, for i did think that thou hadst called me all these bitter names.", "why, so i did, but looked for no reply. o, let me make the period to my curse!", "'tis done by me, and ends in \"margaret.\"", "queen margaret thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.", "poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune, why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider, whose deadly web ensnareth thee about? fool, fool, thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself. the day will come that thou shalt wish for me to help thee curse that poisonous bunch-backed toad.", "false-boding woman, end thy frantic curse, lest to thy harm thou move our patience."], ["foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.", "were you well served, you would be taught your duty.", "to serve me well, you all should do me duty: teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects. o, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!", "rivers dispute not with her; she is lunatic.", "peace, master marquess, you are malapert. your fire-new stamp of honor is scarce current. o, that your young nobility could judge what 'twere to lose it and be miserable! they that stand high have many blasts to shake them, and if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.", "good counsel, marry. learn it, learn it, marquess.", "it touches you, my lord, as much as me.", "ay, and much more; but i was born so high. our aerie buildeth in the cedar's top, and dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.", "and turns the sun to shade. alas, alas, witness my son, now in the shade of death, whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath hath in eternal darkness folded up. your aerie buildeth in our aerie's nest. o god, that seest it, do not suffer it! as it was won with blood, lost be it so."], ["peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.", "urge neither charity nor shame to me. uncharitably with me have you dealt, and shamefully my hopes by you are butchered. my charity is outrage, life my shame, and in that shame still live my sorrows' rage.", "have done, have done.", "o princely buckingham, i'll kiss thy hand in sign of league and amity with thee. now fair befall thee and thy noble house! thy garments are not spotted with our blood, nor thou within the compass of my curse.", "nor no one here, for curses never pass the lips of those that breathe them in the air.", "i will not think but they ascend the sky, and there awake god's gentle-sleeping peace. buckingham o buckingham, take heed of yonder dog! look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites, his venom tooth will rankle to the death. have not to do with him. beware of him. sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him, and all their ministers attend on him.", "what doth she say, my lord of buckingham?", "nothing that i respect, my gracious lord."], ["what, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel, and soothe the devil that i warn thee from? o, but remember this another day, when he shall split thy very heart with sorrow, and say poor margaret was a prophetess. live each of you the subjects to his hate, and he to yours, and all of you to god's.", "my hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.", "and so doth mine. i muse why she's at liberty.", "i cannot blame her. by god's holy mother, she hath had too much wrong, and i repent my part thereof that i have done to her.", "i never did her any, to my knowledge.", "yet you have all the vantage of her wrong. i was too hot to do somebody good that is too cold in thinking of it now. marry, as for clarence, he is well repaid; he is franked up to fatting for his pains. god pardon them that are the cause thereof.", "a virtuous and a christian-like conclusion to pray for them that have done scathe to us.", "so do i ever being well-advised, for had i cursed now, i had cursed myself."], ["madam, his majesty doth call for you, and for your grace, and yours, my gracious lords.", "catesby, i come. lords, will you go with me?", "we wait upon your grace.", "i do the wrong, and first begin to brawl. the secret mischiefs that i set abroach i lay unto the grievous charge of others. clarence, whom i indeed have cast in darkness, i do beweep to many simple gulls, namely, to derby, hastings, buckingham, and tell them 'tis the queen and her allies that stir the king against the duke my brother. now they believe it and withal whet me to be revenged on rivers, dorset, grey; but then i sigh and, with a piece of scripture, tell them that god bids us do good for evil; and thus i clothe my naked villainy with odd old ends stolen out of holy writ, and seem a saint when most i play the devil.", "but, soft! here come my executioners. how now, my hardy, stout, resolvd mates? are you now going to dispatch this thing?", "we are, my lord, and come to have the warrant that we may be admitted where he is."], ["well thought upon. i have it here about me. when you have done, repair to crosby place. but, sirs, be sudden in the execution, withal obdurate; do not hear him plead, for clarence is well-spoken and perhaps may move your hearts to pity if you mark him.", "tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate. talkers are no good doers. be assured we go to use our hands and not our tongues.", "your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears. i like you lads. about your business straight. go, go, dispatch.", "we will, my noble lord."], ["why looks your grace so heavily today?", "o, i have passed a miserable night, so full of ugly dreams, of ugly sights, that, as i am a christian faithful man, i would not spend another such a night though 'twere to buy a world of happy days, so full of dismal terror was the time.", "what was your dream, my lord? i pray you tell me.", "methoughts that i had broken from the tower and was embarked to cross to burgundy, and in my company my brother gloucester, who from my cabin tempted me to walk upon the hatches. thence we looked toward england and cited up a thousand fearful times, during the wars of york and lancaster that had befall'n us. as we paced along upon the giddy footing of the hatches, methought that gloucester stumbled, and in falling struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard into the tumbling billows of the main. o lord, methought what pain it was to drown, what dreadful noise of waters in my ears, what sights of ugly death within my eyes. methoughts i saw a thousand fearful wracks, a thousand men that fishes gnawed upon, wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, inestimable stones, unvalued jewels, all scattered in the bottom of the sea."], ["some lay in dead men's skulls, and in the holes where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept as 'twere in scorn of eyes reflecting gems, that wooed the slimy bottom of the deep and mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.", "had you such leisure in the time of death to gaze upon the secrets of the deep?", "methought i had, and often did i strive to yield the ghost, but still the envious flood stopped in my soul and would not let it forth to find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air, but smothered it within my panting bulk, who almost burst to belch it in the sea.", "awaked you not in this sore agony?", "no, no, my dream was lengthened after life. o, then began the tempest to my soul. i passed, methought, the melancholy flood, with that sour ferryman which poets write of, unto the kingdom of perpetual night. the first that there did greet my stranger-soul was my great father-in-law, renownd warwick, who spake aloud, \"what scourge for perjury can this dark monarchy afford false clarence?\" and so he vanished. then came wand'ring by a shadow like an angel, with bright hair dabbled in blood, and he shrieked out aloud"], ["\"clarence is come false, fleeting, perjured clarence, that stabbed me in the field by tewkesbury. seize on him, furies. take him unto torment.\" with that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends environed me and howld in mine ears such hideous cries that with the very noise i trembling waked, and for a season after could not believe but that i was in hell, such terrible impression made my dream.", "no marvel, lord, though it affrighted you. i am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it.", "ah keeper, keeper, i have done those things, that now give evidence against my soul, for edward's sake, and see how he requites me. o god, if my deep prayers cannot appease thee, but thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds, yet execute thy wrath in me alone! o, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children! keeper, i prithee sit by me awhile. my soul is heavy, and i fain would sleep.", "i will, my lord. god give your grace good rest.", "sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours, makes the night morning, and the noontide night. princes have but their titles for their glories, an outward honor for an inward toil,"], ["and, for unfelt imaginations, they often feel a world of restless cares, so that betwixt their titles and low name there's nothing differs but the outward fame.", "ho, who's here?", "what wouldst thou, fellow? and how cam'st thou hither?", "i would speak with clarence, and i came hither on my legs.", "what, so brief?", "'tis better, sir, to be brief than tedious. let him see our commission, and talk no more.", "i am in this commanded to deliver the noble duke of clarence to your hands. i will not reason what is meant hereby because i will be guiltless from the meaning. there lies the duke asleep, and there the keys. i'll to the king and signify to him that thus i have resigned my charge to you.", "you may, sir. 'tis a point of wisdom. fare you well."], ["what, shall i stab him as he sleeps?", "no. he'll say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.", "why, he shall never wake until the great judgment day.", "why, then he'll say we stabbed him sleeping.", "the urging of that word \"judgment\" hath bred a kind of remorse in me.", "what, art thou afraid?", "not to kill him, having a warrant, but to be damned for killing him, from the which no warrant can defend me.", "i thought thou hadst been resolute.", "so i am to let him live.", "i'll back to the duke of gloucester and tell him so.", "nay, i prithee stay a little. i hope this passionate humor of mine will change. it was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.", "how dost thou feel thyself now?", "faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me."], ["remember our reward when the deed's done.", "zounds, he dies! i had forgot the reward.", "where's thy conscience now?", "o, in the duke of gloucester's purse.", "so when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.", "'tis no matter. let it go. there's few or none will entertain it.", "what if it come to thee again?", "i'll not meddle with it. it makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal but it accuseth him; a man cannot swear but it checks him; a man cannot lie with his neighbor's wife but it detects him. 'tis a blushing, shamefaced spirit that mutinies in a man's bosom. it fills a man full of obstacles. it made me once restore a purse of gold that by chance i found. it beggars any man that keeps it. it is turned out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing, and every man that means to live well endeavors to trust to himself and live without it.", "zounds, 'tis even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.", "take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not. he would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.", "i am strong-framed. he cannot prevail with me."], ["spoke like a tall man that respects thy reputation. come, shall we fall to work?", "take him on the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then throw him into the malmsey butt in the next room.", "o excellent device and make a sop of him.", "soft, he wakes.", "strike!", "no, we'll reason with him.", "where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine.", "you shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.", "in god's name, what art thou?", "a man, as you are.", "but not, as i am, royal.", "nor you, as we are, loyal.", "thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.", "my voice is now the king's, my looks mine own."], ["how darkly and how deadly dost thou speak! your eyes do menace me. why look you pale? who sent you hither? wherefore do you come?", "to, to, to", "to murder me?", "ay, ay.", "you scarcely have the hearts to tell me so, and therefore cannot have the hearts to do it. wherein, my friends, have i offended you?", "offended us you have not, but the king.", "i shall be reconciled to him again.", "never, my lord. therefore prepare to die.", "are you drawn forth among a world of men to slay the innocent? what is my offense? where is the evidence that doth accuse me? what lawful quest have given their verdict up unto the frowning judge? or who pronounced the bitter sentence of poor clarence' death before i be convict by course of law? to threaten me with death is most unlawful. i charge you, as you hope to have redemption, by christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins, that you depart, and lay no hands on me. the deed you undertake is damnable.", "what we will do, we do upon command."], ["and he that hath commanded is our king.", "erroneous vassals, the great king of kings hath in the tables of his law commanded that thou shalt do no murder. will thou then spurn at his edict and fulfill a man's? take heed, for he holds vengeance in his hand to hurl upon their heads that break his law.", "and that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee for false forswearing and for murder too. thou didst receive the sacrament to fight in quarrel of the house of lancaster.", "and, like a traitor to the name of god, didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.", "whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.", "how canst thou urge god's dreadful law to us when thou hast broke it in such dear degree?", "alas! for whose sake did i that ill deed? for edward, for my brother, for his sake. he sends you not to murder me for this, for in that sin he is as deep as i. if god will be avengd for this deed, o, know you yet he doth it publicly! take not the quarrel from his powerful arm; he needs no indirect or lawless course to cut off those that have offended him."], ["who made thee then a bloody minister when gallant-springing, brave plantagenet, that princely novice, was struck dead by thee?", "my brother's love, the devil, and my rage.", "thy brother's love, our duty, and thy faults provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.", "if you do love my brother, hate not me. i am his brother, and i love him well. if you are hired for meed, go back again, and i will send you to my brother gloucester, who shall reward you better for my life than edward will for tidings of my death.", "you are deceived. your brother gloucester hates you.", "o, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear. go you to him from me.", "ay, so we will.", "tell him, when that our princely father york blessed his three sons with his victorious arm, he little thought of this divided friendship. bid gloucester think of this, and he will weep.", "ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.", "o, do not slander him, for he is kind."], ["right, as snow in harvest. come, you deceive yourself. 'tis he that sends us to destroy you here.", "it cannot be, for he bewept my fortune, and hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobs that he would labor my delivery.", "why, so he doth, when he delivers you from this earth's thralldom to the joys of heaven.", "make peace with god, for you must die, my lord.", "have you that holy feeling in your souls to counsel me to make my peace with god, and art you yet to your own souls so blind that thou will war with god by murd'ring me? o sirs, consider: they that set you on to do this deed will hate you for the deed.", "first murderer what shall we do?", "relent, and save your souls. which of you if you were a prince's son being pent from liberty, as i am now if two such murderers as yourselves came to you, would not entreat for life? ay, you would beg, were you in my distress.", "relent? no. 'tis cowardly and womanish."], ["not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish. second murderer my friend, i spy some pity in thy looks. o, if thine eye be not a flatterer, come thou on my side and entreat for me. a begging prince what beggar pities not?", "look behind you, my lord.", "take that, and that. clarence if all this will not do, i'll drown you in the malmsey butt within.", "a bloody deed, and desperately dispatched. how fain, like pilate, would i wash my hands of this most grievous murder.", "how now? what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not? by heavens, the duke shall know how slack you have been.", "i would he knew that i had saved his brother. take thou the fee, and tell him what i say, for i repent me that the duke is slain."], ["so do not i. go, coward as thou art. well, i'll go hide the body in some hole till that the duke give order for his burial. and when i have my meed, i will away, for this will out, and then i must not stay."], ["why, so. now have i done a good day's work. you peers, continue this united league. i every day expect an embassage from my redeemer to redeem me hence, and more in peace my soul shall part to heaven since i have made my friends at peace on earth rivers and hastings, take each other's hand. dissemble not your hatred. swear your love.", "hastings's by heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate, and with my hand i seal my true heart's love.", "so thrive i as i truly swear the like.", "take heed you dally not before your king, lest he that is the supreme king of kings confound your hidden falsehood, and award either of you to be the other's end.", "so prosper i as i swear perfect love.", "and i as i love hastings with my heart."], ["queen elizabeth madam, yourself is not exempt in this, nor you, son dorset, buckingham, nor you. you have been factious one against the other. wife, love lord hastings. let him kiss your hand, and what you do, do it unfeignedly.", "there, hastings, i will never more remember our former hatred, so thrive i and mine.", "dorset, embrace him. hastings, love lord marquess.", "this interchange of love, i here protest, upon my part shall be inviolable.", "and so swear i.", "now, princely buckingham, seal thou this league with thy embracements to my wife's allies and make me happy in your unity."], ["queen elizabeth whenever buckingham doth turn his hate upon your grace, but with all duteous love doth cherish you and yours, god punish me when i have most need to employ a friend, with hate in those where i expect most love. and most assurd that he is a friend, deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile be he unto me: this do i beg of god when i am cold in love to you or yours.", "a pleasing cordial, princely buckingham, is this thy vow unto my sickly heart. there wanteth now our brother gloucester here to make the blessd period of this peace.", "and in good time, here comes sir richard ratcliffe and the duke.", "good morrow to my sovereign king and queen, and, princely peers, a happy time of day.", "happy indeed, as we have spent the day. gloucester, we have done deeds of charity, made peace of enmity, fair love of hate, between these swelling, wrong-incensd peers."], ["a blessd labor, my most sovereign lord. amongst this princely heap, if any here by false intelligence, or wrong surmise hold me a foe, if i unwittingly, or in my rage, have aught committed that is hardly borne by any in this presence, i desire to reconcile me to his friendly peace. 'tis death to me to be at enmity; i hate it, and desire all good men's love. first, madam, i entreat true peace of you, which i will purchase with my duteous service; of you, my noble cousin buckingham, if ever any grudge were lodged between us; of you and you, lord rivers and of dorset, that all without desert have frowned on me; of you, lord woodeville and lord scales; of you, dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all. i do not know that englishman alive with whom my soul is any jot at odds more than the infant that is born tonight. i thank my god for my humility.", "a holy day shall this be kept hereafter. i would to god all strifes were well compounded. my sovereign lord, i do beseech your highness to take our brother clarence to your grace.", "why, madam, have i offered love for this, to be so flouted in this royal presence? who knows not that the gentle duke is dead?", "you do him injury to scorn his corse."], ["who knows not he is dead! who knows he is?", "all-seeing heaven, what a world is this!", "look i so pale, lord dorset, as the rest?", "ay, my good lord, and no one in the presence but his red color hath forsook his cheeks.", "is clarence dead? the order was reversed.", "but he, poor man, by your first order died, and that a wingd mercury did bear. some tardy cripple bear the countermand, that came too lag to see him burid. god grant that some, less noble and less loyal, nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood, deserve not worse than wretched clarence did, and yet go current from suspicion.", "a boon, my sovereign, for my service done.", "i prithee, peace. my soul is full of sorrow.", "i will not rise unless your highness hear me.", "then say at once what is it thou requests.", "the forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life, who slew today a riotous gentleman lately attendant on the duke of norfolk."], ["have i a tongue to doom my brother's death, and shall the tongue give pardon to a slave? my brother killed no man; his fault was thought, and yet his punishment was bitter death. who sued to me for him? who, in my wrath, kneeled at my feet, and bade me be advised? who spoke of brotherhood? who spoke of love? who told me how the poor soul did forsake the mighty warwick and did fight for me? who told me, in the field by tewkesbury, when oxford had me down, he rescued me, and said \"dear brother, live, and be a king\"? who told me, when we both lay in the field frozen almost to death, how he did lap me even in his garments and did give himself, all thin and naked, to the numb-cold night? all this from my remembrance brutish wrath sinfully plucked, and not a man of you had so much grace to put it in my mind. but when your carters or your waiting vassals have done a drunken slaughter and defaced the precious image of our dear redeemer, you straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon, and i, unjustly too, must grant it you. but for my brother, not a man would speak, nor i, ungracious, speak unto myself for him, poor soul. the proudest of you all have been beholding to him in his life, yet none of you would once beg for his life. o god, i fear thy justice will take hold on me and you, and mine and yours for this! come, hastings, help me to my closet. ah, poor clarence."], ["this is the fruits of rashness. marked you not how that the guilty kindred of the queen looked pale when they did hear of clarence' death? o, they did urge it still unto the king. god will revenge it. come, lords, will you go to comfort edward with our company?", "we wait upon your grace."], ["good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?", "no, boy.", "why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast, and cry, \"o clarence, my unhappy son?\"", "why do you look on us and shake your head, and call us orphans, wretches, castaways, if that our noble father were alive?", "my pretty cousins, you mistake me both. i do lament the sickness of the king, as loath to lose him, not your father's death. it were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.", "then, you conclude, my grandam, he is dead. the king mine uncle is to blame for it. god will revenge it, whom i will importune with earnest prayers, all to that effect.", "and so will i.", "peace, children, peace. the king doth love you well. incapable and shallow innocents, you cannot guess who caused your father's death."], ["grandam, we can, for my good uncle gloucester told me the king, provoked to it by the queen, devised impeachments to imprison him; and when my uncle told me so, he wept, and pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek, bade me rely on him as on my father, and he would love me dearly as a child.", "ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape, and with a virtuous visor hide deep vice. he is my son, ay, and therein my shame, yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.", "think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?", "ay, boy.", "i cannot think it. hark, what noise is this?", "ah, who shall hinder me to wail and weep, to chide my fortune and torment myself? i'll join with black despair against my soul and to myself become an enemy.", "what means this scene of rude impatience?", "to make an act of tragic violence. edward, my lord, thy son, our king, is dead. why grow the branches when the root is gone? why wither not the leaves that want their sap?"], ["if you will live, lament. if die, be brief, that our swift-wingd souls may catch the king's, or, like obedient subjects, follow him to his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.", "ah, so much interest have i in thy sorrow as i had title in thy noble husband. i have bewept a worthy husband's death and lived with looking on his images; but now two mirrors of his princely semblance are cracked in pieces by malignant death, and i, for comfort, have but one false glass that grieves me when i see my shame in him. thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother, and hast the comfort of thy children left, but death hath snatched my husband from mine arms and plucked two crutches from my feeble hands, clarence and edward. o, what cause have i, thine being but a moiety of my moan, to overgo thy woes and drown thy cries!", "queen elizabeth ah, aunt, you wept not for our father's death. how can we aid you with our kindred tears?", "our fatherless distress was left unmoaned. your widow-dolor likewise be unwept!", "give me no help in lamentation. i am not barren to bring forth complaints. all springs reduce their currents to mine eyes, that i, being governed by the watery moon, may send forth plenteous tears to drown the world. ah, for my husband, for my dear lord edward!"], ["ah, for our father, for our dear lord clarence!", "alas for both, both mine, edward and clarence!", "what stay had i but edward? and he's gone.", "what stay had we but clarence? and he's gone.", "what stays had i but they? and they are gone.", "was never widow had so dear a loss.", "were never orphans had so dear a loss.", "was never mother had so dear a loss. alas, i am the mother of these griefs. their woes are parceled; mine are general. she for an edward weeps, and so do i; i for a clarence weep; so doth not she. these babes for clarence weep and so do i; i for an edward weep; so do not they. alas, you three, on me, threefold distressed, pour all your tears. i am your sorrow's nurse, and i will pamper it with lamentations."], ["queen elizabeth comfort, dear mother. god is much displeased that you take with unthankfulness, his doing. in common worldly things, 'tis called ungrateful with dull unwillingness to repay a debt which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent; much more to be thus opposite with heaven, for it requires the royal debt it lent you.", "madam, bethink you, like a careful mother, of the young prince your son. send straight for him. let him be crowned. in him your comfort lives. drown desperate sorrow in dead edward's grave and plant your joys in living edward's throne.", "sister, have comfort. all of us have cause to wail the dimming of our shining star, but none can help our harms by wailing them. madam, my mother, i do cry you mercy; i did not see your grace. humbly on my knee i crave your blessing.", "god bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast, love, charity, obedience, and true duty.", "amen. and make me die a good old man! that is the butt end of a mother's blessing; i marvel that her grace did leave it out."], ["you cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers that bear this heavy mutual load of moan, now cheer each other in each other's love. though we have spent our harvest of this king, we are to reap the harvest of his son. the broken rancor of your high-swoll'n hates, but lately splintered, knit, and joined together, must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept. meseemeth good that with some little train forthwith from ludlow the young prince be fet hither to london, to be crowned our king.", "why \"with some little train,\" my lord of buckingham?", "marry, my lord, lest by a multitude the new-healed wound of malice should break out, which would be so much the more dangerous by how much the estate is green and yet ungoverned. where every horse bears his commanding rein and may direct his course as please himself, as well the fear of harm as harm apparent, in my opinion, ought to be prevented.", "i hope the king made peace with all of us; and the compact is firm and true in me.", "and so in me, and so, i think, in all. yet since it is but green, it should be put to no apparent likelihood of breach, which haply by much company might be urged. therefore i say with noble buckingham that it is meet so few should fetch the prince.", "and so say i."], ["then be it so, and go we to determine who they shall be that straight shall post to ludlow. madam, and you, my sister, will you go to give your censures in this business?", "my lord, whoever journeys to the prince, for god's sake let not us two at home. for by the way i'll sort occasion, as index to the story we late talked of, to part the queen's proud kindred from the prince.", "my other self, my council's consistory, my oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin, i, as a child, will go by thy direction toward ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind."], ["good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?", "i promise you i scarcely know myself. hear you the news abroad?", "yes, that the king is dead.", "ill news, by 'r lady. seldom comes the better. i fear, i fear, 'twill prove a giddy world.", "neighbors, god speed.", "give you good morrow, sir.", "doth this news hold of good king edward's death?", "ay, sir, it is too true, god help the while.", "then, masters, look to see a troublous world.", "no, no, by god's good grace, his son shall reign.", "woe to the land that's governed by a child.", "in him there is a hope of government, which, in his nonage, council under him, and, in his full and ripened years, himself, no doubt shall then, and till then, govern well."], ["so stood the state when henry the sixth was crowned in paris but at nine months old.", "stood the state so? no, no, good friends, god wot, for then this land was famously enriched with politic grave counsel; then the king had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.", "why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.", "better it were they all came by his father, or by the father there were none at all, for emulation who shall now be nearest will touch us all too near if god prevent not. o, full of danger is the duke of gloucester, and the queen's sons and brothers haught and proud, and were they to be ruled, and not to rule, this sickly land might solace as before.", "come, come, we fear the worst. all will be well.", "when clouds are seen, wise men put on their cloaks; when great leaves fall, then winter is at hand; when the sun sets, who doth not look for night? untimely storms make men expect a dearth. all may be well; but if god sort it so, 'tis more than we deserve or i expect.", "truly, the hearts of men are full of fear. ye cannot reason almost with a man that looks not heavily and full of dread."], ["before the days of change, still is it so. by a divine instinct, men's minds mistrust ensuing dangers, as by proof we see the water swell before a boist'rous storm. but leave it all to god. whither away?", "marry, we were sent for to the justices.", "and so was i. i'll bear you company."], ["last night, i hear, they lay at stony stratford, and at northampton they do rest tonight. tomorrow or next day they will be here.", "i long with all my heart to see the prince. i hope he is much grown since last i saw him.", "but i hear no; they say my son of york has almost overta'en him in his growth.", "ay, mother, but i would not have it so.", "why, my young cousin? it is good to grow.", "grandam, one night as we did sit at supper, my uncle rivers talked how i did grow more than my brother: \"ay,\" quoth my uncle gloucester, \"small herbs have grace; great weeds do grow apace.\" and since, methinks i would not grow so fast because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.", "good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold in him that did object the same to thee! he was the wretched'st thing when he was young, so long a-growing and so leisurely, that if this rule were true, he should be gracious.", "and so no doubt he is, my gracious madam."], ["i hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.", "now, by my troth, if i had been remembered, i could have given my uncle's grace a flout to touch his growth nearer than he touched mine.", "how, my pretty york? i prithee let me hear it.", "marry, they say my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw a crust at two hours old. 'twas full two years ere i could get a tooth. grandam, this would have been a biting jest.", "i prithee, pretty york, who told thee this?", "grandam, his nurse.", "his nurse? why, she was dead ere thou wast born.", "if 'twere not she, i cannot tell who told me.", "a parlous boy! go to, you are too shrewd.", "good madam, be not angry with the child.", "pitchers have ears.", "here comes a messenger. what news?", "such news, my lord, as grieves me to report."], ["how doth the prince?", "well, madam, and in health.", "what is thy news then?", "lord rivers and lord grey are sent to pomfret, and, with them, sir thomas vaughan, prisoners.", "who hath committed them?", "the mighty dukes, gloucester and buckingham.", "for what offence?", "the sum of all i can, i have disclosed. why, or for what, the nobles were committed is all unknown to me, my gracious lord.", "ay me! i see the ruin of my house. the tiger now hath seized the gentle hind. insulting tyranny begins to jut upon the innocent and aweless throne. welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre. i see, as in a map, the end of all."], ["accursd and unquiet wrangling days, how many of you have mine eyes beheld? my husband lost his life to get the crown, and often up and down my sons were tossed for me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss. and being seated, and domestic broils clean overblown, themselves the conquerors make war upon themselves, brother to brother, blood to blood, self against self. o, preposterous and frantic outrage, end thy damnd spleen, or let me die, to look on death no more.", "york come, come, my boy. we will to sanctuary. madam, farewell.", "stay, i will go with you", "you have no cause.", "queen elizabeth my gracious lady, go, and thither bear your treasure and your goods. for my part, i'll resign unto your grace the seal i keep; and so betide to me as well i tender you and all of yours. go. i'll conduct you to the sanctuary."], ["welcome, sweet prince, to london, to your chamber.", "prince welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign. the weary way hath made you melancholy.", "no, uncle, but our crosses on the way have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy. i want more uncles here to welcome me.", "sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years hath not yet dived into the world's deceit; nor more can you distinguish of a man than of his outward show, which, god he knows, seldom or never jumpeth with the heart. those uncles which you want were dangerous. your grace attended to their sugared words but looked not on the poison of their hearts. god keep you from them, and from such false friends.", "god keep me from false friends, but they were none.", "my lord, the mayor of london comes to greet you."], ["god bless your grace with health and happy days.", "i thank you, good my lord, and thank you all. i thought my mother and my brother york would long ere this have met us on the way. fie, what a slug is hastings that he comes not to tell us whether they will come or no!", "and in good time here comes the sweating lord.", "welcome, my lord. what, will our mother come?", "on what occasion god he knows, not i, the queen your mother and your brother york have taken sanctuary. the tender prince would fain have come with me to meet your grace, but by his mother was perforce withheld.", "fie, what an indirect and peevish course is this of hers! lord cardinal, will your grace persuade the queen to send the duke of york unto his princely brother presently? if she deny, lord hastings, go with him, and from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.", "my lord of buckingham, if my weak oratory can from his mother win the duke of york, anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate to mild entreaties, god in heaven forbid we should infringe the holy privilege of blessd sanctuary! not for all this land would i be guilty of so deep a sin."], ["you are too senseless obstinate, my lord, too ceremonious and traditional. weigh it but with the grossness of this age, you break not sanctuary in seizing him. the benefit thereof is always granted to those whose dealings have deserved the place and those who have the wit to claim the place. this prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it and therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it. then taking him from thence that is not there, you break no privilege nor charter there. oft have i heard of sanctuary men, but sanctuary children, ne'er till now.", "my lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once. come on, lord hastings, will you go with me?", "i go, my lord.", "good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.", "say, uncle gloucester, if our brother come, where shall we sojourn till our coronation?", "where it seems best unto your royal self. if i may counsel you, some day or two your highness shall repose you at the tower; then where you please and shall be thought most fit for your best health and recreation.", "i do not like the tower, of any place. did julius caesar build that place, my lord?"], ["he did, my gracious lord, begin that place, which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.", "is it upon record, or else reported successively from age to age, he built it?", "upon record, my gracious lord.", "but say, my lord, it were not registered, methinks the truth should live from age to age, as 'twere retailed to all posterity, even to the general all-ending day.", "so wise so young, they say, do never live long.", "what say you, uncle?", "i say, without characters fame lives long. thus, like the formal vice, iniquity, i moralize two meanings in one word.", "that julius caesar was a famous man. with what his valor did enrich his wit, his wit set down to make his valor live. death makes no conquest of this conqueror, for now he lives in fame, though not in life. i'll tell you what, my cousin buckingham"], ["what, my gracious lord?", "an if i live until i be a man, i'll win our ancient right in france again or die a soldier, as i lived a king.", "short summers lightly have a forward spring.", "now in good time here comes the duke of york.", "richard of york, how fares our loving brother?", "well, my dread lord so must i call you now.", "ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours. too late he died that might have kept that title, which by his death hath lost much majesty.", "how fares our cousin, noble lord of york?", "i thank you, gentle uncle. o, my lord, you said that idle weeds are fast in growth. the prince my brother hath outgrown me far.", "he hath, my lord.", "and therefore is he idle?"], ["o, my fair cousin, i must not say so.", "then is he more beholding to you than i.", "he may command me as my sovereign, but you have power in me as in a kinsman.", "i pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.", "my dagger, little cousin? with all my heart.", "a beggar, brother?", "of my kind uncle, that i know will give, and being but a toy, which is no grief to give.", "a greater gift than that i'll give my cousin.", "a greater gift? o, that's the sword to it.", "ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.", "o, then i see you will part but with light gifts. in weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.", "it is too heavy for your grace to wear.", "i weigh it lightly, were it heavier.", "what, would you have my weapon, little lord?", "i would, that i might thank you as you call me.", "how?"], ["little.", "my lord of york will still be cross in talk. uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.", "you mean, to bear me, not to bear with me. uncle, my brother mocks both you and me. because that i am little, like an ape, he thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.", "with what a sharp-provided wit he reasons! to mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle, he prettily and aptly taunts himself. so cunning and so young is wonderful.", "prince my lord, will 't please you pass along? myself and my good cousin buckingham will to your mother, to entreat of her to meet you at the tower and welcome you.", "prince what, will you go unto the tower, my lord?", "my lord protector needs will have it so.", "i shall not sleep in quiet at the tower.", "why, what should you fear?", "marry, my uncle clarence' angry ghost. my grandam told me he was murdered there."], ["i fear no uncles dead.", "nor none that live, i hope.", "an if they live, i hope i need not fear. york but come, my lord. with a heavy heart, thinking on them, go i unto the tower.", "think you, my lord, this little prating york was not incensd by his subtle mother to taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?", "no doubt, no doubt. o, 'tis a parlous boy, bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable. he is all the mother's, from the top to toe.", "well, let them rest. come hither, catesby. thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend as closely to conceal what we impart. thou knowest our reasons, urged upon the way. what thinkest thou? is it not an easy matter to make william lord hastings of our mind for the installment of this noble duke in the seat royal of this famous isle?", "he, for his father's sake, so loves the prince that he will not be won to aught against him.", "what think'st thou then of stanley? will not he?", "he will do all in all as hastings doth."], ["well then, no more but this: go, gentle catesby, and, as it were far off, sound thou lord hastings how he doth stand affected to our purpose and summon him tomorrow to the tower to sit about the coronation. if thou dost find him tractable to us, encourage him and show him all our reasons. if he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling, be thou so too, and so break off the talk, and give us notice of his inclination; for we tomorrow hold divided councils, wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.", "commend me to lord william. tell him, catesby, his ancient knot of dangerous adversaries tomorrow are let blood at pomfret castle, and bid my lord, for joy of this good news, give mistress shore one gentle kiss the more.", "good catesby, go effect this business soundly.", "my good lords both, with all the heed i can.", "shall we hear from you, catesby, ere we sleep?", "you shall, my lord.", "at crosby place, there shall you find us both.", "now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive lord hastings will not yield to our complots?"], ["chop off his head. something we will determine. and look when i am king, claim thou of me the earldom of hereford, and all the moveables whereof the king my brother was possessed.", "i'll claim that promise at your grace's hands.", "and look to have it yielded with all kindness. come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards we may digest our complots in some form."], ["my lord, my lord.", "who knocks?", "one from the lord stanley.", "what is t o'clock?", "upon the stroke of four.", "cannot my lord stanley sleep these tedious nights?", "so it appears by that i have to say. first, he commends him to your noble self.", "what then?", "then certifies your lordship that this night he dreamt the boar had razd his helm besides, he says there are two councils kept, and that may be determined at the one which may make you and him to rue at th' other. therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure, if you will presently take horse with him and with all speed post with him toward the north to shun the danger that his soul divines."], ["go, fellow, go. return unto thy lord. bid him not fear the separated council. his honor and myself are at the one, and at the other is my good friend catesby, where nothing can proceed that toucheth us whereof i shall not have intelligence. tell him his fears are shallow, without instance. and for his dreams, i wonder he's so simple to trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers. to fly the boar before the boar pursues were to incense the boar to follow us and make pursuit where he did mean no chase. go, bid thy master rise and come to me, and we will both together to the tower, where he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.", "i'll go, my lord, and tell him what you say.", "many good morrows to my noble lord.", "good morrow, catesby. you are early stirring. what news, what news in this our tott'ring state?", "it is a reeling world indeed, my lord, and i believe will never stand upright till richard wear the garland of the realm.", "how \"wear the garland\"? dost thou mean the crown?"], ["ay, my good lord.", "i'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders before i'll see the crown so foul misplaced. but canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?", "ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward upon his party for the gain thereof; and thereupon he sends you this good news, that this same very day your enemies, the kindred of the queen, must die at pomfret.", "indeed, i am no mourner for that news, because they have been still my adversaries. but that i'll give my voice on richard's side to bar my master's heirs in true descent, god knows i will not do it, to the death.", "god keep your lordship in that gracious mind.", "but i shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence, that they which brought me in my master's hate, i live to look upon their tragedy. well, catesby, ere a fortnight make me older i'll send some packing that yet think not on 't.", "'tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, when men are unprepared and look not for it.", "o monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out with rivers, vaughan, grey; and so 'twill do with some men else that think themselves as safe as thou and i, who, as thou know'st, are dear to princely richard and to buckingham."], ["the princes both make high account of you for they account his head upon the bridge.", "i know they do, and i have well deserved it.", "come on, come on. where is your boar-spear, man? fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?", "my lord, good morrow. good morrow, catesby. you may jest on, but, by the holy rood, i do not like these several councils, i.", "my lord, i hold my life as dear as you do yours, and never in my days, i do protest, was it so precious to me as 'tis now. think you but that i know our state secure, i would be so triumphant as i am?", "the lords at pomfret, when they rode from london, were jocund and supposed their states were sure, and they indeed had no cause to mistrust; but yet you see how soon the day o'ercast. this sudden stab of rancor i misdoubt. pray god, i say, i prove a needless coward! what, shall we toward the tower? the day is spent."], ["come, come. have with you. wot you what, my lord? today the lords you talked of are beheaded.", "they, for their truth, might better wear their heads than some that have accused them wear their hats. but come, my lord, let's away.", "go on before. i'll talk with this good fellow.", "how now, sirrah! how goes the world with thee?", "the better that your lordship please to ask.", "i tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now than when thou met'st me last where now we meet. then was i going prisoner to the towerby the suggestion of the queen's allies. but now, i tell thee keep it to thyself this day those enemies are put to death, and i in better state than e'er i was.", "god hold it, to your honor's good content!", "gramercy, fellow. there, drink that for me.", "i thank your honor."], ["well met, my lord. i am glad to see your honor.", "i thank thee, good sir john, with all my heart. i am in your debt for your last exercise. come the next sabbath, and i will content you.", "i'll wait upon your lordship", "what, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain? your friends at pomfret, they do need the priest; your honor hath no shriving work in hand.", "good faith, and when i met this holy man, the men you talk of came into my mind. what, go you toward the tower?", "i do, my lord, but long i shall not stay there. i shall return before your lordship thence.", "nay, like enough, for i stay dinner there.", "and supper too, although thou know'st it not. come, will you go?", "i'll wait upon your lordship."], ["sir richard ratcliffe, let me tell thee this: today shalt thou behold a subject die for truth, for duty, and for loyalty.", "ratcliffe god bless the prince from all the pack of you! a knot you are of damnd bloodsuckers.", "ratcliffe you live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.", "dispatch. the limit of your lives is out.", "o pomfret, pomfret! o thou bloody prison, fatal and ominous to noble peers! within the guilty closure of thy walls, richard the second here was hacked to death, and, for more slander to thy dismal seat, we give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.", "now margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads, when she exclaimed on hastings, you, and i, for standing by when richard stabbed her son.", "then cursed she richard, then cursed she buckingham. then cursed she hastings. o, remember, god, to hear her prayer for them, as now for us! and for my sister and her princely sons, be satisfied, dear god, with our true blood, which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt."], ["make haste. the hour of death is expiate.", "come, grey. come, vaughan. let us all embrace. farewell until we meet in heaven."], ["now, noble peers. the cause why we are met is to determine of the coronation. in god's name, speak. when is the royal day?", "is all things ready for the royal time?", "it is, and wants but nomination.", "tomorrow, then, i judge a happy day.", "who knows the lord protector's mind herein? who is most inward with the noble duke?", "your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.", "we know each other's faces; for our hearts, he knows no more of mine than i of yours, or i of his, my lord, than you of mine. lord hastings, you and he are near in love.", "i thank his grace. i know he loves me well. but for his purpose in the coronation, i have not sounded him, nor he delivered his gracious pleasure any way therein. but you, my honorable lords, may name the time, and in the duke's behalf i'll give my voice, which i presume he'll take in gentle part."], ["in happy time here comes the duke himself.", "my noble lords and cousins all, good morrow. i have been long a sleeper; but i trust my absence doth neglect no great design which by my presence might have been concluded.", "had you not come upon your cue, my lord, william lord hastings had pronounced your part i mean your voice for crowning of the king.", "than my lord hastings no man might be bolder. his lordship knows me well, and loves me well. my lord of ely, when i was last in holborn i saw good strawberries in your garden there; i do beseech you, send for some of them.", "marry and will, my lord, with all my heart.", "cousin of buckingham, a word with you. catesby hath sounded hastings in our business and finds the testy gentleman so hot as he will lose his head ere give consent his master's child, as worshipfully he terms it, shall lose the royalty of england's throne.", "withdraw yourself awhile. i'll go with you."], ["we have not yet set down this day of triumph. tomorrow, in my judgement, is too sudden, for i myself am not so well provided as else i would be, were the day prolonged.", "where is my lord the duke of gloucester? i have sent for these strawberries.", "his grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning. there's some conceit or other likes him well when that he bids good morrow with such spirit. i think there's never a man in christendom can lesser hide his love or hate than he, for by his face straight shall you know his heart.", "what of his heart perceive you in his face by any livelihood he showed today?", "marry, that with no man here he is offended, for were he, he had shown it in his looks.", "i pray god he be not, i say.", "i pray you all, tell me what they deserve that do conspire my death with devilish plots of damnd witchcraft, and that have prevailed upon my body with their hellish charms?"], ["the tender love i bear your grace, my lord, makes me most forward in this princely presence to doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be. i say, my lord, they have deservd death.", "then be your eyes the witness of their evil. look how i am bewitched! behold mine arm is like a blasted sapling withered up; and this is edward's wife, that monstrous witch, consorted with that harlot, strumpet shore, that by their witchcraft thus have markd me.", "if they have done this deed, my noble lord", "if? thou protector of this damnd strumpet, talk'st thou to me of \"ifs\"? thou art a traitor off with his head. now by saint paul i swear i will not dine until i see the same. lovell and ratcliffe, look that it be done. the rest that love me, rise and follow me.", "woe, woe for england! not a whit for me, for i, too fond, might have prevented this. stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm, and i did scorn it and disdain to fly. three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble, and started when he looked upon the tower, as loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse. o, now i need the priest that spake to me!"], ["i now repent i told the pursuivant, as too triumphing, how mine enemies today at pomfret bloodily were butchered, and i myself secure in grace and favor. o margaret, margaret, now thy heavy curse is lighted on poor hastings' wretched head.", "come, come, dispatch. the duke would be at dinner. make a short shrift. he longs to see your head.", "o momentary grace of mortal men, which we more hunt for than the grace of god! who builds his hopes in air of your good looks lives like a drunken sailor on a mast, ready with every nod to tumble down into the fatal bowels of the deep.", "come, come, dispatch. 'tis bootless to exclaim.", "o bloody richard! miserable england, i prophesy the fearfull'st time to thee that ever wretched age hath looked upon. come, lead me to the block. bear him my head. they smile at me that shortly shall be dead."], ["come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy color, murder thy breath in the middle of a word, and then begin again, and stop again, as if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?", "tut, i can counterfeit the deep tragedian, speak, and look back, and pry on every side, tremble and start at wagging of a straw, intending deep suspicion. ghastly looks are at my service, like enforcd smiles, and both are ready in their offices, at any time to grace my stratagems. but what, is catesby gone?", "he is; and see, he brings the mayor along.", "lord mayor", "look to the drawbridge there!", "hark, a drum!", "catesby, o'erlook the walls."], ["lord mayor, the reason we have sent", "look back! defend thee! here are enemies.", "god and our innocence defend and guard us!", "be patient. they are friends, ratcliffe and lovell.", "here is the head of that ignoble traitor, the dangerous and unsuspected hastings.", "so dear i loved the man that i must weep. i took him for the plainest harmless creature that breathed upon this earth a christian; made him my book, wherein my soul recorded the history of all her secret thoughts. so smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue that, his apparent open guilt omitted i mean his conversation with shore's wife he lived from all attainder of suspects.", "well, well, he was the covert'st sheltered traitor that ever lived. would you imagine, or almost believe, were 't not that by great preservation we live to tell it, that subtle traitor this day had plotted, in the council house to murder me and my good lord of gloucester?", "had he done so?"], ["what, think you we are turks or infidels? or that we would, against the form of law, proceed thus rashly in the villain's death, but that the extreme peril of the case, the peace of england and our persons' safety enforced us to this execution?", "now fair befall you! he deserved his death, and your good graces both have well proceeded to warn false traitors from the like attempts.", "i never looked for better at his hands after he once fell in with mistress shore. yet had we not determined he should die until your lordship came to see his end (which now the loving haste of these our friends, something against our meaning, have prevented), because, my lord, i would have had you heard the traitor speak, and timorously confess the manner and the purpose of his treasons, that you might well have signified the same unto the citizens, who haply may misconstrue us in him, and wail his death.", "but, my good lord, your graces' words shall serve as well as i had seen and heard him speak; and do not doubt, right noble princes both, but i'll acquaint our duteous citizens with all your just proceedings in this case.", "and to that end we wished your lordship here t' avoid the censures of the carping world."], ["which since you come too late of our intent, yet witness what you hear we did intend. and so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.", "go, after, after, cousin buckingham. the mayor towards guildhall hies him in all post. there, at your meetest vantage of the time, infer the bastardy of edward's children. tell them how edward put to death a citizen only for saying he would make his son heir to the crown meaning indeed his house, which, by the sign thereof, was termd so. moreover, urge his hateful luxury and bestial appetite in change of lust, which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives, even where his raging eye or savage heart, without control, lusted to make his prey. nay, for a need, thus far come near my person: tell them when that my mother went with child of that insatiate edward, noble york my princely father then had wars in france, and, by true computation of the time, found that the issue was not his begot, which well appeard in his lineaments, being nothing like the noble duke my father. yet touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off, because, my lord, you know my mother lives."], ["doubt not, my lord. i'll play the orator as if the golden fee for which i plead were for myself. and so, my lord, adieu.", "if you thrive well, bring them to baynard's castle, where you shall find me well accompanied with reverend fathers and well-learnd bishops.", "i go; and towards three or four o'clock look for the news that the guildhall affords.", "go, lovell, with all speed to doctor shaw. ratcliffe go thou to friar penker. bid them both meet me within this hour at baynard's castle.", "now will i go to take some privy order to draw the brats of clarence out of sight, and to give order that no manner of person have any time recourse unto the princes."], ["this is the indictment of the good lord hastings, which in a set hand fairly is engrossed, that it may be today read o'er in paul's. and mark how well the sequel hangs together: eleven hours i have spent to write it over, for yesternight by catesby was it sent me; the precedent was full as long a-doing, and yet within these five hours hastings lived, untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty. here's a good world the while. who is so gross that cannot see this palpable device? yet who so bold but says he sees it not? bad is the world, and all will come to naught when such ill dealing must be seen in thought."], ["how now, how now? what say the citizens?", "now, by the holy mother of our lord, the citizens are mum, say not a word.", "touched you the bastardy of edward's children?", "i did; with his contract with lady lucy and his contract by deputy in france; th' unsatiate greediness of his desire and his enforcement of the city wives; his tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy, as being got, your father then in france, his resemblance being not like the duke. withal, i did infer your lineaments, being the right idea of your father, both in your form and nobleness of mind; laid open all your victories in scotland, your discipline in war, wisdom in peace, your bounty, virtue, fair humility; indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose untouched or slightly handled in discourse. and when mine oratory grew toward end, i bid them that did love their country's good cry \"god save richard, england's royal king!\"", "and did they so?"], ["no. so god help me, they spake not a word but, like dumb statues or breathing stones, stared each on other and looked deadly pale; which when i saw, i reprehended them and asked the mayor what meant this willful silence. his answer was, the people were not used to be spoke to but by the recorder. then he was urged to tell my tale again: \"thus saith the duke. thus hath the duke inferred\" but nothing spoke in warrant from himself. when he had done, some followers of mine own, at the lower end of the hall, hurled up their caps, and some ten voices cried \"god save king richard!\" and thus i took the vantage of those few. \"thanks, gentle citizens and friends,\" quoth i. \"this general applause and cheerful shout argues your wisdoms and your love to richard\" and even here brake off, and came away.", "what tongueless blocks were they! would not they speak? will not the mayor then and his brethren come?", "the mayor is here at hand. intend some fear; be not you spoke with but by mighty suit. and look you get a prayer book in your hand and stand between two churchmen, good my lord, for on that ground i'll make a holy descant. and be not easily won to our requests. play the maid's part: still answer \"nay,\" and take it.", "i go. an if you plead as well for them as i can say \"nay\" to thee for myself, no doubt we bring it to a happy issue."], ["go, go, up to the leads. the lord mayor knocks.", "welcome, my lord. i dance attendance here. i think the duke will not be spoke withal.", "now, catesby, what says your lord to my request?", "he doth entreat your grace, my noble lord, to visit him tomorrow or next day. he is within, with two right reverend fathers, divinely bent to meditation, and in no worldly suits would he be moved to draw him from his holy exercise.", "return, good catesby, to the gracious duke. tell him myself, the mayor, and aldermen, no less importing than our general good, in deep designs, and matters of great moment are come to have some conference with his grace.", "i'll signify so much unto him straight."], ["ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an edward! he is not lolling on a lewd love bed, but on his knees at meditation; not dallying with a brace of courtesans, but meditating with two deep divines; not sleeping, to engross his idle body, but praying, to enrich his watchful soul. happy were england would this virtuous prince take on his grave the sovereignty thereof. but sure i fear we shall not win him to it.", "marry, god defend his grace should say us nay!", "i fear he will. here catesby comes again.", "now, catesby, what says his grace?", "he wonders to what end you have assembled such troops of citizens to come to him, his grace not being warned thereof before. he fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.", "sorry i am my noble cousin should suspect me that i mean no good to him. by heaven, we come to him in perfect love, and so once more return and tell his grace.", "when holy and devout religious men are at their beads, 'tis much to draw them thence, so sweet is zealous contemplation."], ["see where his grace stands, 'tween two clergymen.", "two props of virtue for a christian prince, to stay him from the fall of vanity; and, see, a book of prayer in his hand, true ornaments to know a holy man. famous plantagenet, most gracious prince, lend favorable ears to our requests, and pardon us the interruption of thy devotion and right christian zeal.", "my lord, there needs no such apology. i do beseech your grace pardon me, who, earnest in the service of my god, deferred the visitation of my friends. but, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure?", "even that, i hope, which pleaseth god above and all good men of this ungoverned isle.", "i do suspect i have done some offense that seems disgracious in the city's eye, and that you come to reprehend my ignorance.", "you have, my lord. would it might please your grace, on our entreaties, to amend your fault.", "else wherefore breathe i in a christian land?"], ["know, then, it is your fault that you resign the supreme seat, the throne majestical, the sceptered office of your ancestors, your state of fortune, and your due of birth, the lineal glory of your royal house, to the corruption of a blemished stock, whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts, which here we waken to our country's good, the noble isle doth want her proper limbs her face defaced with scars of infamy, her royal stock graft with ignoble plants, and almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion; which to recure, we heartily solicit your gracious self to take on you the charge and kingly government of this your land, not as protector, steward, substitute, or lowly factor for another's gain, but as successively, from blood to blood, your right of birth, your empery, your own. for this, consorted with the citizens, your very worshipful and loving friends, and by their vehement instigation, in this just suit come i to move your grace.", "i cannot tell if to depart in silence or bitterly to speak in your reproof best fitteth my degree or your condition. if not to answer, you might haply think tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded to bear the golden yoke of sovereignty, which fondly you would here impose on me. if to reprove you for this suit of yours, so seasoned with your faithful love to me, then on the other side i checked my friends. therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first, and then, in speaking, not to incur the last, definitively thus i answer you: your love deserves my thanks, but my desert unmeritable shuns your high request. first, if all obstacles were cut away and that my path were even to the crown as the ripe revenue and due of birth, yet so much is my poverty of spirit, so mighty and so many my defects, that i would rather hide me from my greatness, being a bark to brook no mighty sea, than in my greatness covet to be hid and in the vapor of my glory smothered. but, god be thanked, there is no need of me, and much i need to help you, were there need. the royal tree hath left us royal fruit, which, mellowed by the stealing hours of time, will well become the seat of majesty, and make, no doubt, us happy by his reign. on him i lay what you would lay on me, the right and fortune of his happy stars, which god defend that i should wring from him."], ["my lord, this argues conscience in your grace, but the respects thereof are nice and trivial, all circumstances well considerd. you say that edward is your brother's son; so say we too, but not by edward's wife. for first was he contract to lady lucy your mother lives a witness to that vow and afterward by substitute betrothed to bona, sister to the king of france. these both put off, a poor petitioner, a care-crazed mother to a many sons, a beauty-waning and distressd widow, even in the afternoon of her best days, made prize and purchase of his wanton eye, seduced the pitch and height of his degree to base declension and loathed bigamy. by her in his unlawful bed he got this edward, whom our manners term \"the prince.\" more bitterly could i expostulate, save that, for reverence to some alive, i give a sparing limit to my tongue. then, good my lord, take to your royal self this proffered benefit of dignity, if not to bless us and the land withal, yet to draw forth your noble ancestry from the corruption of abusing times unto a lineal, true-derivd course."], ["do, good my lord. your citizens entreat you.", "refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.", "o, make them joyful. grant their lawful suit.", "alas, why would you heap this care on me? i am unfit for state and majesty. i do beseech you, take it not amiss; i cannot, nor i will not, yield to you.", "if you refuse it, as in love and zeal loath to depose the child, your brother's son as well we know your tenderness of heart and gentle, kind, effeminate remorse, which we have noted in you to your kindred and equally indeed to all estates yet know whe'er you accept our suit or no, your brother's son shall never reign our king, but we will plant some other in the throne, to the disgrace and downfall of your house. and in this resolution here we leave you. come, citizens. zounds, i'll entreat no more."], ["o, do not swear, my lord of buckingham!", "call them again, sweet prince. accept their suit. if you deny them, all the land will rue it.", "will you enforce me to a world of cares? call them again. i am not made of stones, but penetrable to your kind entreaties, albeit against my conscience and my soul.", "cousin of buckingham and sage, grave men, since you will buckle fortune on my back, to bear her burden, whe'er i will or no, i must have patience to endure the load; but if black scandal or foul-faced reproach attend the sequel of your imposition, your mere enforcement shall acquittance me from all the impure blots and stains thereof, for god doth know, and you may partly see, how far i am from the desire of this.", "god bless your grace! we see it and will say it.", "in saying so, you shall but say the truth."], ["then i salute you with this royal title: long live richard, england's worthy king!", "amen.", "tomorrow will it please you to be crowned?", "even when you please, since you will have it so.", "tomorrow, then, we will attend your grace, and so most joyfully we take our leave.", "come, let us to our holy task again. farewell, my cousin. farewell, gentle friends."], ["who meets us here? my niece plantagenet led in the hand of her kind aunt of gloucester? now, for my life, she's wandering to the tower, on pure heart's love, to greet the tender prince. daughter, well met.", "god give your graces both a happy and a joyful time of day.", "as much to you, good sister. whither away?", "no farther than the tower, and, as i guess, upon the like devotion as yourselves, to gratulate the gentle princes there.", "kind sister, thanks. we'll enter all together.", "and in good time here the lieutenant comes. master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave, how doth the prince and my young son of york?", "right well, dear madam. by your patience, i may not suffer you to visit them. the king hath strictly charged the contrary."], ["the king? who's that?", "i mean, the lord protector.", "the lord protect him from that kingly title! hath he set bounds between their love and me? i am their mother. who shall bar me from them?", "i am their father's mother. i will see them.", "their aunt i am in law, in love their mother. then bring me to their sights. i'll bear thy blame and take thy office from thee, on my peril.", "no, madam, no. i may not leave it so. i am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.", "let me but meet you ladies one hour hence, and i'll salute your grace of york as mother and reverend looker-on, of two fair queens. anne come, madam, you must straight to westminster, there to be crownd richard's royal queen.", "ah, cut my lace asunder, that my pent heart may have some scope to beat, or else i swoon with this dead-killing news!", "despiteful tidings! o, unpleasing news!", "queen elizabeth be of good cheer, mother. how fares your grace?"], ["o dorset, speak not to me. get thee gone. death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels. thy mother's name is ominous to children. if thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas, and live with richmond, from the reach of hell. go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughterhouse, lest thou increase the number of the dead and make me die the thrall of margaret's curse, nor mother, wife, nor england's counted queen.", "full of wise care is this your counsel, madam. dorset take all the swift advantage of the hours. you shall have letters from me to my son in your behalf, to meet you on the way. be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.", "o ill-dispersing wind of misery! o my accursd womb, the bed of death! a cockatrice hast thou hatched to the world, whose unavoided eye is murderous.", "anne come, madam, come. i in all haste was sent.", "and i in all unwillingness will go. o, would to god that the inclusive verge of golden metal that must round my brow were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains! anointed let me be with deadly venom, and die ere men can say, \"god save the queen.\"", "go, go, poor soul, i envy not thy glory. to feed my humor, wish thyself no harm."], ["no? why? when he that is my husband now came to me, as i followed henry's corse, when scarce the blood was well washed from his hands which issued from my other angel husband and that dear saint which then i weeping followed o, when, i say, i looked on richard's face, this was my wish: be thou, quoth i, accursed for making me, so young, so old a widow; and, when thou wedd'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed; and be thy wife, if any be so mad, more miserable by the life of thee than thou hast made me by my dear lord's death. lo, ere i can repeat this curse again, within so small a time my woman's heart grossly grew captive to his honey words and proved the subject of mine own soul's curse, which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest, for never yet one hour in his bed did i enjoyed the golden dew of sleep, but with his timorous dreams was still awaked. besides, he hates me for my father warwick, and will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.", "poor heart, adieu. i pity thy complaining.", "no more than from my soul i mourn for yours.", "farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.", "adieu, poor soul that tak'st thy leave of it."], ["dorset go thou to richmond, and good fortune guide thee. anne go thou to richard, and good angels tend thee. queen elizabeth go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee. i to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me. eighty-odd years of sorrow have i seen, and each hour's joy wracked with a week of teen.", "stay, yet look back with me unto the tower. pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes whom envy hath immured within your walls rough cradle for such little pretty ones. rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow for tender princes, use my babies well. so foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell."], ["stand all apart. cousin of buckingham.", "my gracious sovereign.", "give me thy hand.", "thus high, by thy advice and thy assistance is king richard seated. but shall we wear these glories for a day, or shall they last and we rejoice in them?", "still live they, and forever let them last.", "ah, buckingham, now do i play the touch, to try if thou be current gold indeed. young edward lives; think now what i would speak.", "say on, my loving lord.", "why, buckingham, i say i would be king,", "why so you are, my thrice-renownd lord.", "ha! am i king? 'tis so but edward lives.", "true, noble prince."], ["o bitter consequence that edward still should live \"true noble prince\"! cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull. shall i be plain? i wish the bastards dead, and i would have it suddenly performed. what sayest thou now? speak suddenly. be brief.", "your grace may do your pleasure.", "tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes. say, have i thy consent that they shall die?", "give me some little breath, some pause, dear lord, before i positively speak in this. i will resolve you herein presently.", "the king is angry. see, he gnaws his lip.", "i will converse with iron-witted fools and unrespective boys. none are for me that look into me with considerate eyes. high-reaching buckingham grows circumspect. boy!", "my lord?", "know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold will tempt unto a close exploit of death?"], ["i know a discontented gentleman whose humble means match not his haughty spirit. gold were as good as twenty orators, and will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.", "what is his name?", "his name, my lord, is tyrrel.", "i partly know the man. go, call him hither, boy", "the deep-revolving witty buckingham no more shall be the neighbor to my counsels hath he so long held out with me, untired, and stops he now for breath? well, be it so.", "how now, lord stanley, what's the news?", "know, my long lord, the marquess dorset, as i hear, is fled to richmond, in the parts where he abides.", "come hither, catesby. rumor it abroad that anne my wife is very grievous sick. i will take order for her keeping close. inquire me out some mean poor gentleman, whom i will marry straight to clarence' daughter. the boy is foolish, and i fear not him. look how thou dream'st! i say again, give out that anne my queen is sick and like to die. about it, for it stands me much upon to stop all hopes whose growth may damage me."], ["i must be married to my brother's daughter, or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass. murder her brothers, and then marry her uncertain way of gain. but i am in so far in blood that sin will pluck on sin. tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.", "is thy name tyrrel?", "james tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.", "art thou indeed?", "prove me, my gracious sovereign.", "dar'st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?", "please you. but i had rather kill two enemies.", "why then, thou hast it. two deep enemies, foes to my rest, and my sweet sleep's disturbers, are they that i would have thee deal upon. tyrrel, i mean those bastards in the tower.", "let me have open means to come to them, and soon i'll rid you from the fear of them.", "thou sing'st sweet music. hark, come hither, tyrrel.", "go, by this token. rise, and lend thine ear."], ["there is no more but so. say it is done, and i will love thee and prefer thee for it.", "i will dispatch it straight.", "my lord, i have considered in my mind the late request that you did sound me in.", "well, let that rest. dorset is fled to richmond.", "i hear the news, my lord.", "stanley, he is your wife's son. well, look unto it.", "my lord, i claim the gift, my due by promise, for which your honor and your faith is pawned th' earldom of hereford and the movables which you promisd i shall possess.", "stanley, look to your wife. if she convey letters to richmond, you shall answer it.", "what says your highness to my just request?"], ["i do remember me, henry the sixth did prophesy that richmond should be king, when richmond was a little peevish boy. a king, perhaps", "my lord", "how chance the prophet could not at that time have told me, i being by, that i should kill him?", "my lord, your promise for the earldom", "richmond! when last i was at exeter, the mayor in courtesy showed me the castle and called it rougemont, at which name i started, because a bard of ireland told me once i should not live long after i saw richmond.", "my lord", "ay, what's o'clock?", "i am thus bold to put your grace in mind of what you promised me.", "well, but what's o'clock?", "upon the stroke of ten.", "well, let it strike.", "why let it strike?"], ["because that, like a jack, thou keep'st the stroke betwixt thy begging and my meditation. i am not in the giving vein today.", "why then, resolve me whether you will or no.", "thou troublest me; i am not in the vein.", "and is it thus? repays he my deep service with such deep contempt? made i him king for this? o, let me think on hastings and be gone to brecknock, while my fearful head is on!"], ["the tyrannous and bloody act is done, the most arch deed of piteous massacre that ever yet this land was guilty of. dighton and forrest, whom i did suborn to do this piece of ruthless butchery, albeit they were fleshed villains, bloody dogs, melted with tenderness and mild compassion, wept like two children in their deaths' sad story. \"o thus\" quoth dighton, \"lay those gentle babes.\" \"thus, thus,\" quoth forrest, \"girdling one another within their alabaster innocent arms. their lips were four red roses on a stalk, and in their summer beauty kissed each other. a book of prayers on their pillow lay, which once,\" quoth forrest, \"almost changed my mind, but o, the devil \"there the villain stopped; when dighton thus told on: \"we smotherd the most replenishd sweet work of nature that from the prime creation e'er she framed.\" hence both are gone with conscience and remorse; they could not speak; and so i left them both to bear this tidings to the bloody king.", "and here he comes. all health, my sovereign lord.", "kind tyrrel, am i happy in thy news?"], ["if to have done the thing you gave in charge beget your happiness, be happy then, for it is done.", "but did'st thou see them dead?", "i did, my lord.", "and buried, gentle tyrrel?", "the chaplain of the tower hath buried them, but where, to say the truth, i do not know.", "come to me, tyrrel, soon at after-supper, when thou shalt tell the process of their death. meantime, but think how i may do thee good, and be inheritor of thy desire. farewell till then.", "i humbly take my leave.", "the son of clarence have i pent up close, his daughter meanly have i matched in marriage, the sons of edward sleep in abraham's bosom, and anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight. now, for i know the breton richmond aims at young elizabeth, my brother's daughter, and by that knot looks proudly on the crown, to her go i, a jolly thriving wooer."], ["my lord!", "good or bad news, that thou com'st in so bluntly?", "bad news, my lord. morton is fled to richmond, and buckingham, backed with the hardy welshmen, is in the field, and still his power increaseth.", "ely with richmond troubles me more near than buckingham and his rash-levied strength. come, i have learned that fearful commenting is leaden servitor to dull delay; delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary; then fiery expedition be my wing, jove's mercury, and herald for a king. go, muster men. my counsel is my shield. we must be brief when traitors brave the field."], ["so now prosperity begins to mellow and drop into the rotten mouth of death. here in these confines slyly have i lurked to watch the waning of mine enemies. a dire induction am i witness to, and will to france, hoping the consequence will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. withdraw thee, wretched margaret. who comes here?", "ah, my poor princes! ah, my tender babes, my unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets, if yet your gentle souls fly in the air and be not fixed in doom perpetual, hover about me with your airy wings and hear your mother's lamentation.", "hover about her; say that right for right hath dimmed your infant morn to agd night.", "so many miseries have crazed my voice that my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute. edward plantagenet, why art thou dead?", "plantagenet doth quit plantagenet; edward for edward pays a dying debt."], ["wilt thou, o god, fly from such gentle lambs and throw them in the entrails of the wolf? when didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?", "when holy harry died, and my sweet son.", "dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost, woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurped, brief abstract and record of tedious days, rest thy unrest on england's lawful earth, unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.", "ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave as thou canst yield a melancholy seat, then would i hide my bones, not rest them here. o, who hath any cause to mourn but we?", "if ancient sorrow be most reverend, give mine the benefit of seigniory, and let my griefs frown on the upper hand. if sorrow can admit society, tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine. i had an edward till a richard killed him; i had a husband till a richard killed him. thou hadst an edward till a richard killed him; thou hadst a richard till a richard killed him.", "i had a richard too, and thou did'st kill him; i had a rutland too; thou holp'st to kill him."], ["thou hadst a clarence too, and richard killed him then forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept a hellhound that doth hunt us all to death that dog, that had his teeth before his eyes, to worry lambs and lap their gentle blood; that excellent grand tyrant of the earth, that reigns in galld eyes of weeping souls; that foul defacer of god's handiwork thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves. o upright, just, and true-disposing god, how do i thank thee that this carnal cur preys on the issue of his mother's body and makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!", "o harry's wife, triumph not in my woes! god witness with me, i have wept for thine.", "bear with me, i am hungry for revenge, and now i cloy me with beholding it. thy edward he is dead, that killed my edward, thy other edward dead, to quit my edward; young york, he is but boot, because both they matched not the high perfection of my loss. thy clarence he is dead that stabbed my edward, and the beholders of this frantic play, th' adulterate hastings, rivers, vaughan, grey, untimely smothered in their dusky graves. richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer, only reserved their factor to buy souls and send them thither. but at hand, at hand ensues his piteous and unpitied end. earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray, to have him suddenly conveyed from hence. cancel his bond of life, dear god i pray, that i may live to say, \"the dog is dead.\""], ["o, thou didst prophesy the time would come that i should wish for thee to help me curse that bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!", "i called thee then \"vain flourish of my fortune.\" i called thee then poor shadow, \"painted queen,\" the presentation of but what i was, the flattering index of a direful pageant, one heaved a-high, to be hurled down below, a mother only mocked with two fair babes, a dream of what thou wast, a garish flag to be the aim of every dangerous shot, a sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble, a queen in jest, only to fill the scene. where is thy husband now? where be thy brothers? where are thy two sons? wherein dost thou joy? who sues and kneels and says \"god save the queen?\" where be the bending peers that flattered thee? where be the thronging troops that followed thee? decline all this, and see what now thou art: for happy wife, a most distressd widow; for joyful mother, one that wails the name; for queen, a very caitiff crowned with care; for she that scorned at me, now scorned of me; for she being feared of all, now fearing one; for she commanding all, obeyed of none. thus hath the course of justice whirled about and left thee but a very prey to time, having no more but thought of what thou wast to torture thee the more, being what thou art. thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not usurp the just proportion of my sorrow? now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke, from which even here i slip my weary head and leave the burthen of it all on thee. farewell, york's wife, and queen of sad mischance. these english woes will make me smile in france."], ["o, thou well-skilled in curses, stay awhile, and teach me how to curse mine enemies.", "forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days; compare dead happiness with living woe; think that thy babes were sweeter than they were, and he that slew them fouler than he is. bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse. revolving this will teach thee how to curse.", "my words are dull. o, quicken them with thine!", "thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine.", "why should calamity be full of words?", "windy attorneys to their clients' woes, airy succeeders of intestate joys, poor breathing orators of miseries, let them have scope, though what they will impart help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.", "if so, then be not tongue-tied. go with me, and in the breath of bitter words let's smother my damnd son that thy two sweet sons smothered.", "the trumpet sounds. be copious in exclaims."], ["who intercepts my expedition?", "o, she that might have intercepted thee, by strangling thee in her accursd womb, from all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done.", "hid'st thou that forehead with a golden crown where should be branded, if that right were right, the slaughter of the prince that owed that crown and the dire death of my poor sons and brothers? tell me, thou villain-slave, where are my children?", "thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother clarence? and little ned plantagenet his son?", "where is gentle rivers, vaughan, grey?", "where is kind hastings?", "a flourish, trumpets! strike alarum, drums! let not the heavens hear these telltale women rail on the lord's anointed. strike, i say!", "either be patient and entreat me fair, or with the clamorous report of war thus will i drown your exclamations.", "art thou my son?"], ["ay, i thank god, my father, and yourself.", "then patiently hear my impatience.", "madam, i have a touch of your condition, which cannot brook the accent of reproof.", "o, let me speak!", "do then, but i'll not hear.", "i will be mild and gentle in my words.", "and brief, good mother, for i am in haste.", "art thou so hasty? i have stayed for thee, god knows, in torment and in agony.", "and came i not at last to comfort you?", "no, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well. thou cam'st on earth to make the earth my hell. a grievous burden was thy birth to me; tetchy and wayward was thy infancy; thy school days frightful, desp'rate, wild, and furious; thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous; thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody, more mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred. what comfortable hour canst thou name, that ever graced me in thy company?"], ["faith, none but humfrey hower, that called your grace to breakfast once, forth of my company. if i be so disgracious in your eye, let me march on and not offend you, madam. strike up the drum.", "i prithee, hear me speak.", "you speak too bitterly.", "hear me a word, for i shall never speak to thee again.", "so.", "either thou wilt die by god's just ordinance ere from this war thou turn a conqueror, or i with grief and extreme age shall perish and nevermore behold thy face again. therefore take with thee my most grievous curse, which in the day of battle tire thee more than all the complete armor that thou wear'st. my prayers on the adverse party fight, and there the little souls of edward's children whisper the spirits of thine enemies and promise them success and victory. bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end. shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend."], ["though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse abides in me. i say amen to her.", "stay, madam. i must talk a word with you.", "i have no more sons of the royal blood for thee to slaughter. for my daughters, richard, they shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens, and therefore level not to hit their lives.", "you have a daughter called elizabeth, virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.", "and must she die for this? o, let her live, and i'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty, slander myself as false to edward's bed, throw over her the veil of infamy. so she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter, i will confess she was not edward's daughter.", "wrong not her birth. she is a royal princess.", "to save her life, i'll say she is not so.", "her life is safest only in her birth.", "and only in that safety died her brothers.", "lo, at their births good stars were opposite.", "no, to their lives ill friends were contrary.", "all unavoided is the doom of destiny."], ["true, when avoided grace makes destiny. my babes were destined to a fairer death if grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.", "you speak as if that i had slain my cousins.", "cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozened of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life. whose hand soever launched their tender hearts, thy head, all indirectly, gave direction. no doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart, to revel in the entrails of my lambs. but that still use of grief makes wild grief tame, my tongue should to thy ears not name my boys till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes, and i, in such a desp'rate bay of death, like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft, rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.", "madam, so thrive i in my enterprise and dangerous success of bloody wars as i intend more good to you and yours than ever you or yours were by me harmed!", "what good is covered with the face of heaven, to be discovered, that can do me good?", "the advancement of your children, gentle lady.", "up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.", "unto the dignity and height of fortune, the high imperial type of this earth's glory."], ["flatter my sorrow with report of it. tell me what state, what dignity, what honor, canst thou demise to any child of mine?", "even all i have ay, and myself and all will i withal endow a child of thine; so in the lethe of thy angry soul thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs which thou supposest i have done to thee.", "be brief, lest that the process of thy kindness last longer telling than thy kindness' date.", "then know that from my soul i love thy daughter.", "my daughter's mother thinks it with her soul.", "what do you think?", "that thou dost love my daughter from thy soul. so from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers, and from my heart's love i do thank thee for it.", "be not so hasty to confound my meaning. i mean that with my soul i love thy daughter and do intend to make her queen of england.", "well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?", "even he that makes her queen. who else should be?", "what, thou?", "even so. how think you of it?"], ["how canst thou woo her?", "that would i learn of you, as one being best acquainted with her humor.", "and wilt thou learn of me?", "madam, with all my heart.", "send to her, by the man that slew her brothers, a pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave \"edward\" and \"york.\" then haply she will weep. therefore present to her as sometime margaret did to thy father, steeped in rutland's blood a handkerchief, which say to her did drain the purple sap from her sweet brother's body, and bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal. if this inducement move her not to love, send her a letter of thy noble deeds; tell her thou mad'st away her uncle clarence, her uncle rivers, ay, and for her sake mad'st quick conveyance with her good aunt anne.", "you mock me, madam. this is not the way to win your daughter.", "there is no other way, unless thou couldst put on some other shape and not be richard, that hath done all this.", "say that i did all this for love of her.", "nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee, having bought love with such a bloody spoil."], ["look what is done cannot be now amended. men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes, which after-hours give leisure to repent. if i did take the kingdom from your sons, to make amends i'll give it to your daughter. if i have killed the issue of your womb, to quicken your increase i will beget mine issue of your blood upon your daughter. a grandam's name is little less in love than is the doting title of a mother. they are as children but one step below, even of your metal, of your very blood, of all one pain, save for a night of groans endured of her for whom you bid like sorrow. your children were vexation to your youth, but mine shall be a comfort to your age. the loss you have is but a son being king, and by that loss your daughter is made queen. i cannot make you what amends i would; therefore accept such kindness as i can. dorset your son, that with a fearful soul leads discontented steps in foreign soil, this fair alliance quickly shall call home to high promotions and great dignity. the king that calls your beauteous daughter wife familiarly shall call thy dorset brother. again shall you be mother to a king, and all the ruins of distressful times repaired with double riches of content. what, we have many goodly days to see! the liquid drops of tears that you have shed shall come again, transformed to orient pearl, advantaging their love with interest of ten times double gain of happiness. go then, my mother; to thy daughter go."], ["make bold her bashful years with your experience; prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale; put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame of golden sovereignty; acquaint the princess with the sweet silent hours of marriage joys; and when this arm of mine hath chastisd the petty rebel, dull-brained buckingham, bound with triumphant garlands will i come and lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed, to whom i will retail my conquest won, and she shall be sole victoress, caesar's caesar.", "what were i best to say? her father's brother would be her lord? or shall i say her uncle? or he that slew her brothers and her uncles? under what title shall i woo for thee, that god, the law, my honor and her love can make seem pleasing to her tender years?", "infer fair england's peace by this alliance.", "which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.", "tell her the king, that may command, entreats", "that, at her hands, which the king's king forbids.", "say she shall be a high and mighty queen.", "to vail the title, as her mother doth.", "say i will love her everlastingly."], ["but how long shall that title \"ever\" last?", "sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.", "but how long fairly shall her sweet life last?", "as long as heaven and nature lengthens it.", "as long as hell and richard likes of it.", "say i, her sovereign, am her subject low.", "but she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.", "be eloquent in my behalf to her.", "an honest tale speeds best being plainly told.", "then plainly to her tell my loving tale.", "plain and not honest is too harsh a style.", "your reasons are too shallow and too quick.", "o no, my reasons are too deep and dead too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.", "harp not on that string, madam; that is past.", "harp on it still shall i till heart-strings break.", "now by my george, my garter, and my crown", "profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped."], ["i swear", "by nothing, for this is no oath. thy george, profaned, hath lost his lordly honor; thy garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue; thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory. if something thou wouldst swear to be believed, swear then by something that thou hast not wronged.", "then, by myself", "thyself is self-misused.", "now, by the world", "'tis full of thy foul wrongs.", "my father's death", "thy life hath it dishonored.", "why then, by god.", "god's wrong is most of all. if thou didst fear to break an oath by him, the unity the king my husband made thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died. if thou hadst feared to break an oath by him, th' imperial metal circling now thy head had graced the tender temples of my child, and both the princes had been breathing here, which now, two tender bedfellows for dust, thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms. what canst thou swear by now?"], ["the time to come.", "that thou hast wrongd in the time o'erpast; for i myself have many tears to wash hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee. the children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered, ungoverned youth, to wail it in their age; the parents live whose children thou hast butchered, old barren plants, to wail it with their age. swear not by time to come, for that thou hast misused ere used, by times ill-used o'erpast.", "as i intend to prosper and repent, so thrive i in my dangerous affairs of hostile arms! myself myself confound, heaven and fortune bar me happy hours, day, yield me not thy light, nor night thy rest, be opposite all planets of good luck to my proceedings if, with dear heart's love, immaculate devotion, holy thoughts, i tender not thy beauteous princely daughter. in her consists my happiness and thine. without her follows to myself and thee, herself, the land, and many a christian soul, death, desolation, ruin and decay. it cannot be avoided but by this; it will not be avoided but by this. therefore, dear mother i must call you so be the attorney of my love to her: plead what i will be, not what i have been; not my deserts, but what i will deserve. urge the necessity and state of times, and be not peevish found in great designs."], ["shall i be tempted of the devil thus?", "ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.", "shall i forget myself to be myself?", "ay, if your self's remembrance wrong yourself.", "yet thou didst kill my children.", "but in your daughter's womb i bury them, where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed selves of themselves, to your recomforture.", "shall i go win my daughter to thy will?", "and be a happy mother by the deed.", "i go. write to me very shortly, and you shall understand from me her mind.", "bear her my true love's kiss; and so, farewell.", "relenting fool and shallow, changing woman!", "how now, what news?"], ["most mighty sovereign, on the western coast rideth a puissant navy. to our shores throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends, unarmed and unresolved to beat them back. 'tis thought that richmond is their admiral; and there they hull, expecting but the aid of buckingham to welcome them ashore.", "some light-foot friend post to the duke of norfolk ratcliffe, thyself, or catesby. where is he?", "here, my good lord.", "catesby, fly to the duke.", "i will, my lord, with all convenient haste.", "ratcliffe, come hither. post to salisbury. when thou com'st thither catesby dull, unmindful villain, why stay'st thou here and go'st not to the duke?", "first, mighty liege, tell me your highness' pleasure, what from your grace i shall deliver to him.", "o true, good catesby. bid him levy straight the greatest strength and power that he can make and meet me suddenly at salisbury.", "i go."], ["what, may it please you, shall i do at salisbury?", "why, what wouldst thou do there before i go?", "your highness told me i should post before.", "my mind is changed.", "stanley, what news with you?", "none good, my liege, to please you with the hearing, nor none so bad but well may be reported.", "hoyday, a riddle! neither good nor bad. what need'st thou run so many mile about when thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way? once more, what news?", "richmond is on the seas.", "there let him sink, and be the seas on him! white-livered runagate, what doth he there?", "i know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.", "well, as you guess?", "stirred up by dorset, buckingham, and morton, he makes for england, here to claim the crown."], ["is the chair empty? is the sword unswayed? is the king dead, the empire unpossessed? what heir of york is there alive but we? and who is england's king but great york's heir? then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?", "unless for that, my liege, i cannot guess.", "unless for that he comes to be your liege, you cannot guess wherefore the welshman comes. thou wilt revolt and fly to him, i fear.", "no, my good lord. therefore mistrust me not.", "where is thy power, then, to beat him back? where be thy tenants and thy followers? are they not now upon the western shore, safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?", "no, my good lord. my friends are in the north.", "cold friends to me. what do they in the north when they should serve their sovereign in the west?", "they have not been commanded, mighty king. pleaseth your majesty to give me leave, i'll muster up my friends and meet your grace where and what time your majesty shall please.", "ay, thou wouldst be gone to join with richmond, but i'll not trust thee."], ["most mighty sovereign, you have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful. i never was nor never will be false.", "go then and muster men, but leave behind your son george stanley. look your heart be firm. or else his head's assurance is but frail.", "so deal with him as i prove true to you.", "my gracious sovereign, now in devonshire, as i by friends am well advertisd, sir edward courtney and the haughty prelate, bishop of exeter, his elder brother, with many more confederates are in arms.", "in kent, my liege, the guilfords are in arms, and every hour more competitors flock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.", "my lord, the army of great buckingham", "out on you, owls! nothing but songs of death. there, take thou that till thou bring better news."], ["the news i have to tell your majesty is that by sudden floods and fall of waters buckingham's army is dispersed and scattered, and he himself wandered away alone, no man knows whither.", "i cry thee mercy. there is my purse to cure that blow of thine. hath any well-advisd friend proclaimed reward to him that brings the traitor in?", "such proclamation hath been made, my lord.", "sir thomas lovell and lord marquess dorset, 'tis said, my liege, in yorkshire are in arms. but this good comfort bring i to your highness: the breton navy is dispersed by tempest. richmond, in dorsetshire, sent out a boat unto the shore to ask those on the banks if they were his assistants, yea or no who answered him they came from buckingham upon his party. he, mistrusting them, hoisted sail and made his course for brittany.", "march on, march on, since we are up in arms, if not to fight with foreign enemies, yet to beat down these rebels here at home."], ["my liege, the duke of buckingham is taken. that is the best news. that the earl of richmond is with a mighty power landed at milford, is colder tidings, yet they must be told.", "away towards salisbury! while we reason here, a royal battle might be won and lost. someone take order buckingham be brought to salisbury. the rest march on with me."], ["sir christopher, tell richmond this from me: that in the sty of the most deadly boar my son george stanley is franked up in hold; if i revolt, off goes young george's head; the fear of that holds off my present aid. so get three gone. commend me to thy lord. withal, say that the queen hath heartily consented he should espouse elizabeth her daughter. but, tell me, where is princely richmond now?", "at pembroke, or at ha'rfordwest in wales.", "what men of name resort to him?", "sir walter herbert, a renownd soldier; sir gilbert talbot, sir william stanley, oxford, redoubted pembroke, sir james blunt, and rice ap thomas, with a valiant crew, and many other of great name and worth; and towards london they do bend their power, if by the way they be not fought withal.", "well, hie thee to thy lord. i kiss his hand. my letter will resolve him of my mind. farewell."], ["will not king richard let me speak with him?", "no, my good lord. therefore be patient.", "hastings and edward's children, grey and rivers, holy king henry and thy fair son edward, vaughan, and all that have miscarrid by underhand, corrupted, foul injustice, if that your moody, discontented souls do through the clouds behold this present hour, even for revenge mock my destruction. this is all souls' day, fellow, is it not?", "it is.", "why, then all souls' day is my body's doomsday. this is the day which, in king edward's time, i wished might fall on me when i was found false to his children and his wife's allies. this is the day wherein i wished to fall by the false faith of him who most i trusted. this, this all souls' day to my fearful soul is the determined respite of my wrongs. that high all-seer which i dallied with hath turned my feignd prayer on my head and given in earnest what i begged in jest."], ["thus doth he force the swords of wicked men to turn their own points in their masters' bosoms. thus margaret's curse falls heavy upon my neck: \"when he,\" quoth she, \"shall split thy heart with sorrow, remember margaret was a prophetess.\" come, lead me, officers, to the block of shame. wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame."], ["fellows in arms, and my most loving friends, bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny, have we marched on without impediment, thus far into the bowels of the land and here receive we from our father stanley lines of fair comfort and encouragement. the wretched, bloody, and usurping boar, that spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines, swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough in your embowelled bosoms this foul swine is now even in the center of this isle, near to the town of leicester, as we learn. from tamworth thither is but one day's march. in god's name, cheerly on, courageous friends, to reap the harvest of perpetual peace by this one bloody trial of sharp war.", "every man's conscience is a thousand men, to fight against this guilty homicide.", "i doubt not but his friends will turn to us.", "he hath no friends but who are friends for fear. which in his dearest need will fly from him.", "all for our vantage. then, in god's name, march. true hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings. kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings."], ["here pitch our tent, even here in bosworth field. my lord of surrey, why look you so sad?", "my heart is ten times lighter than my looks.", "my lord of norfolk", "here, most gracious liege.", "norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?", "we must both give and take, my loving lord.", "up with my tent! here will i lie tonight. but where tomorrow? well, all's one for that. who hath descried the number of the traitors?", "six or seven thousand is their utmost power.", "why, our battalia trebles that account. besides, the king's name is a tower of strength which they upon the adverse party want. up with the tent! come, noble gentlemen, let us survey the vantage of the ground. call for some men of sound direction. let's lack no discipline, make no delay, for, lords, tomorrow is a busy day."], ["the weary sun hath made a golden set, and by the bright track of his fiery car, gives token of a goodly day tomorrow. sir william brandon, you shall bear my standard. give me some ink and paper in my tent; i'll draw the form and model of our battle, limit each leader to his several charge, and part in just proportion our small power. my lord of oxford, you, sir william brandon, and you, sir walter herbert, stay with me. the earl of pembroke keeps his regiment good captain blunt, bear my goodnight to him, and by the second hour in the morning desire the earl to see me in my tent. yet one thing more, good captain, do for me. where is lord stanley quartered, do you know?", "unless i have mista'en his colors much, which well i am assured i have not done, his regiment lies half a mile, at least, south from the mighty power of the king.", "if without peril it be possible, sweet blunt, make some good means to speak with him, and give him from me this most needful note.", "upon my life, my lord, i'll undertake it. and so god give you quiet rest tonight!"], ["good night, good captain blunt.", "come, gentlemen, let us consult upon tomorrow's business into my tent. the dew is raw and cold.", "what is \"t o\"clock?", "it's suppertime, my lord. it's nine o'clock.", "i will not sup tonight. give me some ink and paper. what, is my beaver easier than it was? and all my armor laid into my tent?", "it is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.", "good norfolk, hie thee to thy charge. use careful watch. choose trusty sentinels.", "i go, my lord.", "stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle norfolk.", "i warrant you, my lord.", "catesby."], ["my lord.", "send out a pursuivant-at-arms to stanley's regiment. bid him bring his power before sunrising, lest his son george fall into the blind cave of eternal night.", "fill me a bowl of wine. give me a watch. saddle white surrey for the field to-morrow. look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy. ratcliffe.", "my lord.", "sawst thou the melancholy lord northumberland?", "thomas the earl of surrey and himself, much about cockshut time, from troop to troop went through the army cheering up the soldiers.", "so, i am satisfied. give me a bowl of wine. i have not that alacrity of spirit nor cheer of mind that i was wont to have. set it down. is ink and paper ready?", "it is, my lord.", "bid my guard watch. leave me. ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my tent and help to arm me. leave me, i say."], ["fortune and victory sit on thy helm!", "all comfort that the dark night can afford be to thy person, noble father-in-law. tell me, how fares our loving mother?", "i, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother, who prays continually for richmond's good. so much for that. the silent hours steal on, and flaky darkness breaks within the east. in brief, for so the season bids us be, prepare thy battle early in the morning, and put thy fortune to the arbitrament of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war. i, as i may that which i would i cannot, with best advantage will deceive the time, and aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms. but on thy side i may not be too forward, lest, being seen, thy brother, tender george, be executed in his father's sight. farewell. the leisure and the fearful time cuts off the ceremonious vows of love and ample interchange of sweet discourse, which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon. god give us leisure for these rites of love! once more, adieu. be valiant, and speed well.", "good lords, conduct him to his regiment: i'll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap, lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow, when i should mount with wings of victory. once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen."], ["o thou, whose captain i account myself, look on my forces with a gracious eye. put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath, that they may crush down with a heavy fall the usurping helmets of our adversaries! make us thy ministers of chastisement, that we may praise thee in the victory! to thee i do commend my watchful soul, ere i let fall the windows of mine eyes. sleeping and waking, o, defend me still!", "richard let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow! think how thou stabbed'st me in my prime of youth at tewkesbury. despair therefore, and die! richmond be cheerful, richmond, for the wrongd souls of butchered princes fight in thy behalf. king henry's issue, richmond, comforts thee.", "richard when i was mortal, my anointed body by thee was punchd full of deadly holes. think on the tower and me. despair, and die! harry the sixth bids thee despair and die. richmond virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror. harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king, doth comfort thee in thy sleep. live and flourish."], ["richard let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow, i, that was washed to death with fulsome wine, poor clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death. tomorrow in the battle think on me, and fall thy edgeless sword. despair, and die! richmond thou offspring of the house of lancaster, the wrongd heirs of york do pray for thee good angels guard thy battle. live and flourish.", "richard let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow, rivers, that died at pomfret. despair, and die!", "richard think upon grey, and let thy soul despair!", "richard think upon vaughan, and with guilty fear let fall thy lance. despair, and die!", "richmond awake, and think our wrongs in richard's bosom will conquer him! awake, and win the day."], ["richard dream on thy cousins smothered in the tower. let us be lead within thy bosom, richard, and weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death. thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die. richmond sleep, richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy. good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy. live, and beget a happy race of kings. edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.", "richard bloody and guilty, guiltily awake, and in a bloody battle end thy days. think on lord hastings. despair and die! richmond quiet, untroubled soul, awake, awake. arm, fight, and conquer for fair england's sake.", "richard richard, thy wife, that wretched anne thy wife, that never slept a quiet hour with thee, now fills thy sleep with perturbations. tomorrow, in the battle, think on me, and fall thy edgeless sword: despair and die! richmond thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep. dream of success and happy victory. thy adversary's wife doth pray for thee."], ["richard the last was i that helped thee to the crown; the last was i that felt thy tyranny. o, in the battle think on buckingham, and die in terror of thy guiltiness. dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death. fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath. richmond i died for hope ere i could lend thee aid, but cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed. god and good angels fight on richmond's side, and richard fall in height of all his pride.", "give me another horse! bind up my wounds! have mercy, jesu! soft, i did but dream. o coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me! the lights burn blue. it is now dead midnight. cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh. what do i fear? myself? there's none else by. richard loves richard; that is, i and i. is there a murderer here? no. yes, i am. then fly! what, from myself? great reason why: lest i revenge. what, myself upon myself? alack, i love myself. wherefore? for any good that i myself have done unto myself? o, no! alas, i rather hate myself for hateful deeds committed by myself. i am a villain. yet i lie. i am not. fool, of thyself speak well. fool, do not flatter."], ["my conscience hath a thousand several tongues, and every tongue brings in a several tale, and every tale condemns me for a villain. perjury, perjury, in the highest degree; murder, stern murder, in the direst degree; all several sins, all used in each degree, throng to the bar, crying all, \"guilty! guilty!\" i shall despair. there is no creature loves me, and if i die no soul will pity me. and wherefore should they, since that i myself find in myself no pity to myself? methought the souls of all that i had murdered came to my tent, and every one did threat tomorrow's vengeance on the head of richard.", "my lord.", "zounds, who is there?", "ratcliffe, my lord, 'tis i. the early village cock hath twice done salutation to the morn. your friends are up and buckle on their armor.", "o ratcliffe, i have dreamed a fearful dream! what think'st thou, will our friends prove all true?", "no doubt, my lord.", "o ratcliffe, i fear, i fear.", "nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows."], ["by the apostle paul, shadows tonight have struck more terror to the soul of richard than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers armed in proof and led by shallow richmond. 'tis not yet near day. come, go with me; under our tents i'll play the eavesdropper to see if any mean to shrink from me.", "good morrow, richmond.", "cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen, that you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.", "how have you slept, my lord?", "the sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams that ever entered in a drowsy head have i since your departure had, my lords. methought their souls whose bodies richard murdered came to my tent and cried on victory. i promise you, my soul is very jocund in the remembrance of so fair a dream. how far into the morning is it, lords?", "upon the stroke of four.", "why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction. his oration to his soldiers more than i have said, loving countrymen, the leisure and enforcement of the time forbids to dwell upon. yet remember this:"], ["god and our good cause fight upon our side. the prayers of holy saints and wrongd souls, like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces. richard except, those whom we fight against had rather have us win than him they follow. for what is he they follow? truly, gentlemen, a bloody tyrant and a homicide; one raised in blood, and one in blood established; one that made means to come by what he hath, and slaughtered those that were the means to help him; a base foul stone, made precious by the foil of england's chair, where he is falsely set; one that hath ever been god's enemy. then if you fight against god's enemy, god will, in justice, ward you as his soldiers. if you do sweat to put a tyrant down, you sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain. if you do fight against your country's foes, your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire. if you do fight in safeguard of your wives, your wives shall welcome home the conquerors. if you do free your children from the sword, your children's children quits it in your age. then, in the name of god and all these rights, advance your standards. draw your willing swords. for me, the ransom of my bold attempt shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face; but if i thrive, the gain of my attempt the least of you shall share his part thereof. sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully; god and saint george! richmond and victory!"], ["what said northumberland as touching richmond?", "that he was never traind up in arms.", "he said the truth. and what said surrey then?", "he smiled and said \"the better for our purpose.\"", "he was in the right, and so indeed it is.", "tell the clock there. give me a calendar. who saw the sun today?", "not i, my lord.", "then he disdains to shine, for by the book he should have braved the east an hour ago a black day will it be to somebody. ratcliffe!", "my lord.", "the sun will not be seen today. the sky doth frown and lour upon our army. i would these dewy tears were from the ground. not shine today? why, what is that to me more than to richmond, for the selfsame heaven that frowns on me looks sadly upon him."], ["arm, arm, my lord. the foe vaunts in the field.", "come, bustle, bustle. caparison my horse. call up lord stanley; bid him bring his power. i will lead forth my soldiers to the plain, and thus my battle shall be orderd: my foreward shall be drawn out all in length, consisting equally of horse and foot; our archers shall be placd in the midst. john duke of norfolk, thomas earl of surrey, shall have the leading of this foot and horse. they thus directed, we will follow in the main battle, whose puissance on either side shall be well wingd with our chiefest horse. this, and saint george to boot what think'st thou, norfolk?", "a good direction, warlike sovereign.", "this found i on my tent this morning.", "jockey of norfolk, be not so bold. for dickon thy master is bought and sold. a thing devisd by the enemy. go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge. let not our babbling dreams affright our souls. conscience is but a word that cowards use, devised at first to keep the strong in awe. our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law."], ["march on. join bravely. let us to it pell mell if not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell. his oration to his army what shall i say more than i have inferred? remember whom you are to cope withal, a sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways, a scum of bretons and base lackey peasants, whom their o'er-cloyd country vomits forth to desperate ventures and assured destruction. you sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest; you having lands and blessed with beauteous wives, they would restrain the one, distain the other. and who doth lead them but a paltry fellow, long kept in brittany at our mother's cost, a milksop, one that never in his life felt so much cold as overshoes in snow? let's whip these stragglers o'er the seas again, lash hence these overweening rags of france, these famished beggars weary of their lives, who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit, for want of means, poor rats, had hanged themselves. if we be conquered, let men conquer us, and not these bastard bretons, whom our fathers have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and thumped, and in record, left them the heirs of shame. shall these enjoy our lands, lie with our wives, ravish our daughters?", "hark! i hear their drum. fight, gentlemen of england. fight, bold yeomen. draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head. spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood. amaze the welkin with your broken staves"], ["what says lord stanley? will he bring his power?", "my lord, he doth deny to come.", "off with his son george's head!", "my lord, the enemy is past the marsh. after the battle let george stanley die.", "a thousand hearts are great within my bosom. advance our standards. set upon our foes. our ancient word of courage, fair saint george, inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons. upon them! victory sits on our helms."], ["rescue, my lord of norfolk, rescue, rescue! the king enacts more wonders than a man, daring an opposite to every danger. his horse is slain, and all on foot he fights, seeking for richmond in the throat of death. rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!", "a horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!", "withdraw, my lord. i'll help you to a horse.", "slave, i have set my life upon a cast, and i will stand the hazard of the die. i think there be six richmonds in the field; five have i slain today instead of him. a horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!"], ["god and your arms be praised, victorious friends! the day is ours; the bloody dog is dead.", "courageous richmond, well hast thou acquit thee. lo, here this long-usurpd royalty from the dead temples of this bloody wretch have i plucked off, to grace thy brows withal. wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.", "great god of heaven, say amen to all! but tell me, is young george stanley living?", "he is, my lord, and safe in leicester town, whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.", "what men of name are slain on either side?", "john duke of norfolk, walter, lord ferrers, sir robert brakenbury, and sir william brandon.", "inter their bodies as becomes their births. proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled that in submission will return to us. and then, as we have ta'en the sacrament, we will unite the white rose and the red."], ["smile heaven upon this fair conjunction, that long have frowned upon their enmity. what traitor hears me and says not \"amen?\" england hath long been mad and scarred herself. the brother blindly shed the brother's blood. the father rashly slaughtered his own son. the son, compelled, been butcher to the sire. all this divided york and lancaster, divided, in their dire division. o, now let richmond and elizabeth, the true succeeders of each royal house, by god's fair ordinance conjoin together, and let their heirs, god, if thy will be so. enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace, with smiling plenty and fair prosperous days! abate the edge of traitors, gracious lord, that would reduce these bloody days again, and make poor england weep in streams of blood! let them not live to taste this land's increase, that would with treason wound this fair land's peace. now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again. that she may long live here, god say amen."]], [["two households, both alike in dignity (in fair verona, where we lay our scene), from ancient grudge break to new mutiny, where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. from forth the fatal loins of these two foes a pair of star-crossed lovers take their life, whose misadventured piteous overthrows doth with their death bury their parents' strife. the fearful passage of their death-marked love and the continuance of their parents' rage, which, but their children's end, naught could remove, is now the two hours' traffic of our stage the which, if you with patient ears attend, what here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend."], ["gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.", "no, for then we should be colliers.", "i mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.", "ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.", "i strike quickly, being moved.", "but thou art not quickly moved to strike.", "a dog of the house of montague moves me.", "to move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand. therefore if thou art moved thou runn'st away.", "a dog of that house shall move me to stand. i will take the wall of any man or maid of montague's."], ["that shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.", "'tis true, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. therefore i will push montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.", "the quarrel is between our masters and us their men.", "'tis all one. i will show myself a tyrant. when i have fought with the men, i will be civil with the maids. i will cut off their heads.", "the heads of the maids?", "ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads. take it in what sense thou wilt.", "they must take it in sense that feel it.", "me they shall feel while i am able to stand, and 'tis known i am a pretty piece of flesh.", "'tis well thou art not fish. if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor-john.", "draw thy tool! here comes of the house of montagues.", "my naked weapon is out. quarrel! i will back thee."], ["how? turn thy back and run?", "fear me not.", "no, marry. i fear thee.", "let us take the law of our sides. let them begin.", "i will frown as i pass by, and let them take it as they list.", "nay, as they dare. i will bite my thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.", "do you bite your thumb at us, sir?", "i do bite my thumb, sir.", "do you bite your thumb at us, sir?", "gregory is the law of our side if i say \"ay\"?", "sampson no.", "no, sir. i do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but i bite my thumb, sir.", "do you quarrel, sir?", "quarrel, sir? no, sir."], ["but if you do, sir, i am for you. i serve as good a man as you.", "no better.", "well, sir.", "sampson say \"better.\" here comes one of my master's kinsmen.", "abram yes, better, sir.", "you lie.", "draw, if you be men. gregory, remember thy washing blow.", "part, fools! put up your swords. you know not what you do.", "what, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds? turn thee, benvolio. look upon thy death."], ["i do but keep the peace. put up thy sword, or manage it to part these men with me.", "what, drawn, and talk of peace? i hate the word, as i hate hell, all montagues, and thee. have at thee, coward!", "clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down! down with the capulets! down with the montagues!", "what noise is this? give me my long sword, ho!", "a crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?", "my sword, i say! old montague is come, and flourishes his blade in spite of me.", "thou villain capulet! hold me not. let me go.", "thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe."], ["rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, profaners of this neighbor-staind steel! will they not hear? what, ho! you men, you beasts, that quench the fire of your pernicious rage with purple fountains issuing from your veins, on pain of torture, from those bloody hands throw your mistempered weapons to the ground, and hear the sentence of your movd prince. three civil brawls, bred of an airy word, by thee, old capulet, and montague, have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets and made verona's ancient citizens cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments, to wield old partisans in hands as old, cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate. if ever you disturb our streets again, your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. for this time, all the rest depart away. you, capulet, shall go along with me, and, montague, come you this afternoon to know our farther pleasure in this case, to old free-town, our common judgment-place. once more, on pain of death, all men depart.", "who set this ancient quarrel new abroach? speak, nephew. were you by when it began?"], ["here were the servants of your adversary, and yours, close fighting ere i did approach. i drew to part them. in the instant came the fiery tybalt, with his sword prepared, which, as he breathed defiance to my ears, he swung about his head and cut the winds, who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn. while we were interchanging thrusts and blows, came more and more and fought on part and part, till the prince came, who parted either part.", "oh, where is romeo? saw you him today? right glad i am he was not at this fray.", "madam, an hour before the worshipped sun peered forth the golden window of the east, a troubled mind drove me to walk abroad, where, underneath the grove of sycamore that westward rooteth from this city side, so early walking did i see your son. towards him i made, but he was 'ware of me and stole into the covert of the wood. i, measuring his affections by my own, which then most sought where most might not be found, being one too many by my weary self, pursued my humor not pursuing his, and gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.", "many a morning hath he there been seen, with tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew, adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs. but all so soon as the all-cheering sun should in the farthest east begin to draw the shady curtains from aurora's bed, away from light steals home my heavy son,"], ["and private in his chamber pens himself, shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out, and makes himself an artificial night. black and portentous must this humor prove unless good counsel may the cause remove.", "my noble uncle, do you know the cause?", "i neither know it nor can learn of him.", "have you importuned him by any means?", "both by myself and many other friends. but he, his own affections' counselor, is to himself i will not say how true, but to himself so secret and so close, so far from sounding and discovery, as is the bud bit with an envious worm, ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air, or dedicate his beauty to the same. could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow. we would as willingly give cure as know.", "see, where he comes. so please you, step aside. i'll know his grievance or be much denied.", "i would thou wert so happy by thy stay to hear true shrift. come, madam, let's away."], ["good morrow, cousin.", "is the day so young?", "but new struck nine.", "ay me! sad hours seem long. was that my father that went hence so fast?", "it was. what sadness lengthens romeo's hours?", "not having that which, having, makes them short.", "in love?", "out.", "of love?", "out of her favor, where i am in love.", "alas, that love, so gentle in his view, should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!", "alas, that love, whose view is muffled still, should, without eyes, see pathways to his will! where shall we dine? o me! what fray was here? yet tell me not, for i have heard it all. here's much to do with hate but more with love. why then, o brawling love, o loving hate, o anything of nothing first created! o heavy lightness, serious vanity, misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms! feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health, still-waking sleep, that is not what it is! this love feel i, that feel no love in this. dost thou not laugh?"], ["no, coz, i rather weep.", "good heart, at what?", "at thy good heart's oppression.", "why, such is love's transgression. griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast, which thou wilt propagate, to have it pressed with more of thine. this love that thou hast shown doth add more grief to too much of mine own. love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs; being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes; being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears. what is it else? a madness most discreet, a choking gall, and a preserving sweet. farewell, my coz.", "soft! i will go along. and if you leave me so, you do me wrong.", "tut, i have lost myself. i am not here. this is not romeo. he's some other where.", "tell me in sadness, who is that you love.", "what, shall i groan and tell thee?", "groan! why, no. but sadly, tell me who."], ["a sick man in sadness makes his will, a word ill urged to one that is so ill. in sadness, cousin, i do love a woman.", "i aimed so near when i supposed you loved.", "a right good markman! and she's fair i love.", "a right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.", "well, in that hit you miss. she'll not be hit with cupid's arrow. she hath dian's wit. and, in strong proof of chastity well armed from love's weak childish bow, she lives uncharmed. she will not stay the siege of loving terms, nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes, nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold. oh, she is rich in beauty, only poor that when she dies, with beauty dies her store.", "then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?", "she hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste, for beauty, starved with her severity, cuts beauty off from all posterity. she is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair, to merit bliss by making me despair. she hath forsworn to love, and in that vow do i live dead that live to tell it now.", "be ruled by me. forget to think of her.", "o, teach me how i should forget to think!"], ["by giving liberty unto thine eyes. examine other beauties.", "'tis the way to call hers exquisite, in question more. these happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows, being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair. he that is strucken blind cannot forget the precious treasure of his eyesight lost. show me a mistress that is passing fair; what doth her beauty serve but as a note where i may read who passed that passing fair? farewell. thou canst not teach me to forget.", "i'll pay that doctrine or else die in debt."], ["but montague is bound as well as i, in penalty alike. and 'tis not hard, i think, for men so old as we to keep the peace.", "of honorable reckoning are you both. and pity 'tis you lived at odds so long. but now, my lord, what say you to my suit?", "but saying o'er what i have said before. my child is yet a stranger in the world. she hath not seen the change of fourteen years. let two more summers wither in their pride ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.", "younger than she are happy mothers made.", "and too soon marred are those so early made. earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she. she's the hopeful lady of my earth. but woo her, gentle paris, get her heart. my will to her consent is but a part. an she agreed within her scope of choice, lies my consent and fair according voice. this night i hold an old accustomed feast, whereto i have invited many a guest such as i love. and you among the store, one more, most welcome, makes my number more. at my poor house look to behold this night earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light."], ["such comfort as do lusty young men feel when well-appareled april on the heel of limping winter treads. even such delight among fresh fennel buds shall you this night inherit at my house. hear all, all see, and like her most whose merit most shall be which on more view of many, mine, being one, may stand in number, though in reckoning none, come, go with me.", "peter, go, sirrah, trudge about through fair verona. find those persons out whose names are written there, and to them say my house and welcome on their pleasure stay.", "find them out whose names are written here? it is written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets. but i am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. i must to the learned in good time!", "tut man, one fire burns out another's burning. one pain is lessened by another's anguish. turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning. one desperate grief cures with another's languish. take thou some new infection to thy eye, and the rank poison of the old will die."], ["your plantain leaf is excellent for that.", "for what, i pray thee?", "for your broken shin.", "why romeo, art thou mad?", "not mad, but bound more than a madman is, shut up in prison, kept without my food, whipped and tormented and good e'en, good fellow.", "god 'i' good e'en. i pray, sir, can you read?", "ay, mine own fortune in my misery.", "perhaps you have learned it without book. but i pray, can you read anything you see?", "ay, if i know the letters and the language.", "ye say honestly. rest you merry.", "stay, fellow. i can read. \"seigneur martino and his wife and daughters; county anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady widow of vitruvio; seigneur placentio and his lovely nieces; mercutio and his brother valentine; mine uncle capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece rosaline and livia;"], ["seigneur valentio and his cousin tybalt; lucio and the lively helena.\" a fair assembly. whither should they come?", "up.", "whither? to supper?", "to our house.", "whose house?", "my master's.", "indeed, i should have asked thee that before.", "now i'll tell you without asking. my master is the great rich capulet, and if you be not of the house of montagues, i pray come and crush a cup of wine. rest you merry!", "at this same ancient feast of capulet's sups the fair rosaline whom thou so loves with all the admired beauties of verona. go thither, and with unattainted eye compare her face with some that i shall show, and i will make thee think thy swan a crow.", "when the devout religion of mine eye maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires, and these, who, often drowned, could never die, transparent heretics, be burnt for liars! one fairer than my love? the all-seeing sun ne'er saw her match since first the world begun."], ["tut, you saw her fair, none else being by, herself poised with herself in either eye. but in that crystal scales let there be weighed your lady's love against some other maid that i will show you shining at the feast, and she shall scant show well that now shows best.", "i'll go along, no such sight to be shown, but to rejoice in splendor of mine own."], ["nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.", "now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old i bade her come. what, lamb! what, ladybird! god forbid! where's this girl? what, juliet!", "how now, who calls?", "your mother.", "madam, i am here. what is your will?", "this is the matter. nurse, give leave awhile, we must talk in secret. nurse, come back again. i have remembered me. thou's hear our counsel. thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.", "faith, i can tell her age unto an hour.", "she's not fourteen.", "i'll lay fourteen of my teeth and yet, to my teen be it spoken, i have but four she is not fourteen. how long is it now to lammastide?", "a fortnight and odd days."], ["even or odd, of all days in the year, come lammas eve at night shall she be fourteen. susan and she god rest all christian souls! were of an age. well, susan is with god. she was too good for me. but, as i said, on lammas eve at night shall she be fourteen. that shall she. marry, i remember it well. 'tis since the earthquake now eleven years, and she was weaned i never shall forget it of all the days of the year, upon that day. for i had then laid wormwood to my dug, sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall. my lord and you were then at mantua. nay, i do bear a brain. but, as i said, when it did taste the wormwood on the nipple of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool, to see it tetchy and fall out with the dug! \"shake!\" quoth the dovehouse. 'twas no need, i trow, to bid me trudge. and since that time it is eleven years, for then she could stand alone. nay, by the rood, she could have run and waddled all about, for even the day before, she broke her brow. and then my husband god be with his soul! he was a merry man took up the child. \"yea,\" quoth he, \"dost thou fall upon thy face? thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit, wilt thou not, jule?\" and, by my holy dame, the pretty wretch left crying and said \"ay.\" to see now, how a jest shall come about! i warrant, an i should live a thousand years, i never should forget it. \"wilt thou not, jule?\" quoth he. and, pretty fool, it stinted and said \"ay.\"", "enough of this. i pray thee, hold thy peace."], ["yes, madam. yet i cannot choose but laugh to think it should leave crying and say \"ay.\" and yet, i warrant, it had upon its brow a bump as big as a young cockerel's stone, a perilous knock, and it cried bitterly. \"yea,\" quoth my husband, \"fall'st upon thy face? thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age. wilt thou not, jule?\" it stinted and said \"ay.\"", "and stint thou too, i pray thee, nurse, say i.", "peace, i have done. god mark thee to his grace! thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er i nursed. an i might live to see thee married once, i have my wish.", "marry, that \"marry\" is the very theme i came to talk of. tell me, daughter juliet, how stands your disposition to be married?", "it is an honor that i dream not of.", "an honor! were not i thine only nurse, i would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.", "well, think of marriage now. younger than you here in verona, ladies of esteem are made already mothers. by my count, i was your mother much upon these years that you are now a maid. thus then in brief: the valiant paris seeks you for his love.", "a man, young lady! lady, such a man as all the world. why, he's a man of wax."], ["verona's summer hath not such a flower.", "nay, he's a flower. in faith, a very flower.", "what say you? can you love the gentleman? this night you shall behold him at our feast. read o'er the volume of young paris' face and find delight writ there with beauty's pen. examine every married lineament and see how one another lends content, and what obscured in this fair volume lies find written in the margin of his eyes. this precious book of love, this unbound lover, to beautify him only lacks a cover. the fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride for fair without the fair within to hide. that book in many's eyes doth share the glory that in gold clasps locks in the golden story. so shall you share all that he doth possess by having him, making yourself no less.", "no less? nay, bigger. women grow by men.", "speak briefly. can you like of paris, love?", "i'll look to like if looking liking move. but no more deep will i endart mine eye than your consent gives strength to make it fly."], ["madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in the pantry, and every thing in extremity. i must hence to wait. i beseech you, follow straight.", "we follow thee. juliet, the county stays.", "go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days."], ["what, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse? or shall we on without apology?", "the date is out of such prolixity. we'll have no cupid hoodwinked with a scarf, bearing a tartar's painted bow of lath, scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper, nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke after the prompter for our entrance. but let them measure us by what they will. we'll measure them a measure and be gone.", "give me a torch. i am not for this ambling. being but heavy, i will bear the light.", "nay, gentle romeo, we must have you dance.", "not i, believe me. you have dancing shoes with nimble soles. i have a soul of lead so stakes me to the ground i cannot move.", "you are a lover. borrow cupid's wings and soar with them above a common bound.", "i am too sore enpiercd with his shaft to soar with his light feathers, and so bound, i cannot bound a pitch above dull woe. under love's heavy burden do i sink."], ["and to sink in it, should you burthen love too great oppression for a tender thing.", "is love a tender thing? it is too rough, too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.", "if love be rough with you, be rough with love. prick love for pricking, and you beat love down. give me a case to put my visage in! a visor for a visor. what care i what curious eye doth cote deformities? here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.", "come, knock and enter. and no sooner in but every man betake him to his legs.", "a torch for me. let wantons light of heart tickle the senseless rushes with their heels. for i am proverbed with a grandsire phrase, i'll be a candle holder, and look on. the game was ne'er so fair, and i am done.", "tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word. if thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire, or save your reverence love, wherein thou stick'st up to the ears. come, we burn daylight, ho!", "nay, that's not so.", "i mean, sir, in delay. we waste our lights in vain, like lights by day. take our good meaning, for our judgment sits five times in that ere once in our fine wits."], ["and we mean well in going to this mask, but 'tis no wit to go.", "why, may one ask?", "i dreamt a dream tonight.", "and so did i.", "well, what was yours?", "that dreamers often lie.", "in bed asleep while they do dream things true.", "oh, then, i see queen mab hath been with you.", "queen mab, what's she", "she is the fairies' midwife, and she comes in shape no bigger than an agate stone on the forefinger of an alderman, drawn with a team of little atomi over men's noses as they lie asleep. her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs, the cover of the wings of grasshoppers, her traces of the smallest spider's web, her collars of the moonshine's watery beams, her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film, her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat, not half so big as a round little worm pricked from the lazy finger of a maid."], ["her chariot is an empty hazelnut made by the joiner squirrel or old grub, time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers. and in this state she gallops night by night through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love; on courtiers' knees, that dream on curtsies straight; o'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees; o'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream, which oft the angry mab with blisters plagues, because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are. sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose, and then dreams he of smelling out a suit. and sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail tickling a parson's nose as he lies asleep, then he dreams of another benefice. sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck, and then dreams he of cutting foreign throats, of breaches, ambuscadoes, spanish blades, of healths five fathom deep, and then anon drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes, and being thus frighted swears a prayer or two and sleeps again. this is that very mab that plaits the manes of horses in the night and bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs, which once untangled, much misfortune bodes. this is the hag, when maids lie on their backs, that presses them and learns them first to bear, making them women of good carriage. this is she", "peace, peace, mercutio, peace! thou talk'st of nothing.", "true, i talk of dreams, which are the children of an idle brain, begot of nothing but vain fantasy, which is as thin of substance as the air and more inconstant than the wind, who woos even now the frozen bosom of the north, and, being angered, puffs away from thence, turning his face to the dew-dropping south."], ["this wind you talk of, blows us from ourselves. supper is done, and we shall come too late.", "i fear too early, for my mind misgives some consequence yet hanging in the stars shall bitterly begin his fearful date with this night's revels, and expire the term of a despisd life closed in my breast by some vile forfeit of untimely death. but he that hath the steerage of my course, direct my sail. on, lusty gentlemen.", "strike, drum."], ["where's potpan, that he helps not to take away? he shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!", "when good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands, and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.", "away with the joint-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the plate. good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as thou loves me, let the porter let in susan grindstone and nell. antony and potpan!", "ay, boy, ready.", "you are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.", "we cannot be here and there too. cheerly, boys. be brisk 0awhile, and the longer liver take all.", "welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes ah, my mistresses! which of you all unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you. will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty, she, i'll swear, hath corns. am i come near ye now? welcome, gentlemen! i have seen the day that i have worn a visor and could tell a whispering tale in a fair lady's ear such as would please. 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone. you are welcome, gentlemen. come, musicians, play. a hall, a hall, give room! and foot it, girls. more light, you knaves! and turn the tables up, and quench the fire. the room is grown too hot. ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well. nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin capulet, for you and i are past our dancing days. how long is 't now since last yourself and i were in a mask?"], ["by'r lady, thirty years.", "what, man, 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much. 'tis since the nuptials of lucentio, come pentecost as quickly as it will, some five and twenty years, and then we masked.", "'tis more, 'tis more. his son is elder, sir. his son is thirty.", "will you tell me that? his son was but a ward two years ago.", "servingman what lady is that which doth enrich the hand of yonder knight?", "i know not, sir.", "oh, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! it seems she hangs upon the cheek of night like a rich jewel in an ethiope's ear, beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear. so shows a snowy dove trooping with crows as yonder lady o'er her fellows shows. the measure done, i'll watch her place of stand, and, touching hers, make blessd my rude hand. did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight! for i ne'er saw true beauty till this night."], ["this, by his voice, should be a montague. page fetch me my rapier, boy. what, dares the slave come hither, covered with an antic face, to fleer and scorn at our solemnity? now, by the stock and honor of my kin, to strike him dead i hold it not a sin.", "why, how now, kinsman? wherefore storm you so?", "uncle, this is a montague, our foe, a villain that is hither come in spite to scorn at our solemnity this night.", "young romeo is it?", "'tis he, that villain romeo.", "content thee, gentle coz. let him alone. he bears him like a portly gentleman, and, to say truth, verona brags of him to be a virtuous and well-governed youth. i would not for the wealth of all the town here in my house do him disparagement. therefore be patient. take no note of him. it is my will, the which if thou respect, show a fair presence and put off these frowns, an ill-beseeming semblance for a feast."], ["it fits when such a villain is a guest. i'll not endure him.", "he shall be endured. what, goodman boy! i say, he shall. go to. am i the master here, or you? go to. you'll not endure him! god shall mend my soul, you'll make a mutiny among my guests. you will set cock-a-hoop. you'll be the man!", "why, uncle, 'tis a shame.", "go to, go to. you are a saucy boy. is 't so, indeed? this trick may chance to scathe you, i know what. you must contrary me. marry, 'tis time. well said, my hearts! you are a princox, go. be quiet, or more light, more light! for shame! i'll make you quiet. what, cheerly, my hearts!", "patience perforce with willful choler meeting makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting. i will withdraw, but this intrusion shall now seeming sweet, convert to bitterest gall."], ["juliet if i profane with my unworthiest hand this holy shrine, the gentle sin is this: my lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand to smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.", "good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, which mannerly devotion shows in this, for saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, and palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.", "have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?", "ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.", "o, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do. they pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.", "saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.", "then move not, while my prayer's effect i take.", "", "thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.", "then have my lips the sin that they have took.", "sin from thy lips? o trespass sweetly urged! give me my sin again."], ["you kiss by th' book.", "madam, your mother craves a word with you.", "what is her mother?", "marry, bachelor, her mother is the lady of the house, and a good lady, and a wise and virtuous. i nursed her daughter that you talked withal. i tell you, he that can lay hold of her shall have the chinks.", "is she a capulet? o dear account! my life is my foe's debt.", "romeo away, begone. the sport is at the best.", "ay, so i fear. the more is my unrest.", "nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone. we have a trifling foolish banquet towards. is it e'en so? why, then, i thank you all. i thank you, honest gentlemen. good night. more torches here! come on then, let's to bed. ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late. i'll to my rest."], ["come hither, nurse. what is yond gentleman?", "the son and heir of old tiberio.", "what's he that now is going out of door?", "marry, that, i think, be young petruchio.", "what's he that follows here, that would not dance?", "i know not.", "go ask his name. if he be married. my grave is like to be my wedding bed.", "his name is romeo, and a montague, the only son of your great enemy.", "my only love sprung from my only hate! too early seen unknown, and known too late! prodigious birth of love it is to me, that i must love a loathd enemy.", "what's this? what's this?", "a rhyme i learned even now of one i danced withal.", "anon, anon! come, let's away. the strangers all are gone."], ["now old desire doth in his deathbed lie, and young affection gapes to be his heir. that fair for which love groaned for and would die with tender juliet matched, is now not fair. now romeo is beloved and loves again, alike bewitchd by the charm of looks, but to his foe supposed he must complain, and she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks. being held a foe, he may not have access to breathe such vows as lovers use to swear. and she as much in love, her means much less to meet her new beloved anywhere. but passion lends them power, time means, to meet, tempering extremities with extreme sweet."], ["can i go forward when my heart is here? turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out.", "romeo, my cousin romeo! romeo!", "he is wise, and, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.", "he ran this way and leapt this orchard wall. call, good mercutio.", "nay, i'll conjure too! romeo! humours, madman, passion, lover! appear thou in the likeness of a sigh! speak but one rhyme, and i am satisfied. cry but \"ay me!\" pronounce but \"love\" and \"dove.\" speak to my gossip venus one fair word, one nickname for her purblind son and heir, young abraham cupid, he that shot so true when king cophetua loved the beggar maid. he heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not. the ape is dead, and i must conjure him. i conjure thee by rosaline's bright eyes, by her high forehead and her scarlet lip, by her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh, and the demesnes that there adjacent lie, that in thy likeness thou appear to us."], ["an if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.", "this cannot anger him. 'twould anger him to raise a spirit in his mistress' circle of some strange nature, letting it there stand till she had laid it and conjured it down. that were some spite. my invocation is fair and honest. in his mistress' name i conjure only but to raise up him.", "come, he hath hid himself among these trees, to be consorted with the humorous night. blind is his love and best befits the dark.", "if love be blind, love cannot hit the mark. now will he sit under a medlar tree and wish his mistress were that kind of fruit as maids call medlars when they laugh alone. o romeo, that she were! oh, that she were an open arse, and thou a poperin pear. romeo, good night. i'll to my truckle bed. this field-bed is too cold for me to sleep. come, shall we go?", "go, then, for 'tis in vain to seek him here that means not to be found."], ["he jests at scars that never felt a wound.", "but soft! what light through yonder window breaks? it is the east, and juliet is the sun. arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, who is already sick and pale with grief, that thou, her maid, art far more fair than she. be not her maid since she is envious. her vestal livery is but sick and green, and none but fools do wear it. cast it off! it is my lady. oh, it is my love. oh, that she knew she were! she speaks, yet she says nothing. what of that? her eye discourses. i will answer it. i am too bold. 'tis not to me she speaks. two of the fairest stars in all the heaven, having some business, do entreat her eyes to twinkle in their spheres till they return. what if her eyes were there, they in her head? the brightness of her cheek would shame those stars as daylight doth a lamp. her eye in heaven would through the airy region stream so bright that birds would sing and think it were not night. see how she leans her cheek upon her hand. oh, that i were a glove upon that hand that i might touch that cheek!", "ay me!"], ["she speaks. o, speak again, bright angel! for thou art as glorious to this night, being o'er my head, as is a wingd messenger of heaven unto the white, upturnd, wondering eyes of mortals that fall back to gaze on him when he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds and sails upon the bosom of the air.", "o romeo, romeo! wherefore art thou romeo? deny thy father and refuse thy name. or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love, and i'll no longer be a capulet.", "shall i hear more, or shall i speak at this?", "'tis but thy name that is my enemy. thou art thyself, though not a montague. what's montague? it is nor hand, nor foot, nor arm, nor face, nor any other part belonging to a man. o, be some other name! what's in a name? that which we call a rose by any other word would smell as sweet. so romeo would, were he not romeo called, retain that dear perfection which he owes without that title. romeo, doff thy name, and for that name, which is no part of thee take all myself.", "i take thee at thy word. call me but love, and i'll be new baptized. henceforth i never will be romeo.", "what man art thou that, thus bescreened in night, so stumblest on my counsel?"], ["by a name i know not how to tell thee who i am. my name, dear saint, is hateful to myself because it is an enemy to thee. had i it written, i would tear the word.", "my ears have not yet drunk a hundred words of that tongue's uttering, yet i know the sound. art thou not romeo, and a montague?", "neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.", "how camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore? the orchard walls are high and hard to climb, and the place death, considering who thou art, if any of my kinsmen find thee here.", "with love's light wings did i o'erperch these walls, for stony limits cannot hold love out, and what love can do, that dares love attempt. therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.", "if they do see thee they will murder thee.", "alack, there lies more peril in thine eye than twenty of their swords. look thou but sweet, and i am proof against their enmity.", "i would not for the world they saw thee here.", "i have night's cloak to hide me from their eyes, and but thou love me, let them find me here. my life were better ended by their hate than death prorogud, wanting of thy love."], ["by whose direction found'st thou out this place?", "by love, that first did prompt me to inquire. he lent me counsel and i lent him eyes. i am no pilot. yet, wert thou as far as that vast shore washed with the farthest sea, i would adventure for such merchandise.", "thou know'st the mask of night is on my face, else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek for that which thou hast heard me speak tonight. fain would i dwell on form. fain, fain deny what i have spoke. but farewell compliment! dost thou love me? i know thou wilt say \"ay,\" and i will take thy word. yet if thou swear'st thou mayst prove false. at lovers' perjuries, they say, jove laughs. o gentle romeo, if thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully. or if thou think'st i am too quickly won, i'll frown and be perverse and say thee nay, so thou wilt woo. but else, not for the world. in truth, fair montague, i am too fond, and therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light. but trust me, gentleman, i'll prove more true than those that have more coying to be strange. i should have been more strange, i must confess, but that thou overheard'st, ere i was 'ware, my true love's passion. therefore pardon me, and not impute this yielding to light love, which the dark night hath so discovered.", "lady, by yonder blessd moon i vow, that tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops"], ["o, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon, that monthly changes in her circle orb, lest that thy love prove likewise variable.", "what shall i swear by?", "do not swear at all. or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self, which is the god of my idolatry, and i'll believe thee.", "if my heart's dear love", "well, do not swear. although i joy in thee, i have no joy of this contract tonight. it is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden, too like the lightning, which doth cease to be ere one can say \"it lightens.\" sweet, good night. this bud of love, by summer's ripening breath, may prove a beauteous flower when next we meet. good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest come to thy heart as that within my breast.", "o, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?", "what satisfaction canst thou have tonight?", "th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.", "i gave thee mine before thou didst request it, and yet i would it were to give again.", "wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?"], ["but to be frank, and give it thee again. and yet i wish but for the thing i have. my bounty is as boundless as the sea, my love as deep. the more i give to thee, the more i have, for both are infinite.", "i hear some noise within. dear love, adieu. anon, good nurse! sweet montague, be true. stay but a little. i will come again.", "o blessd, blessd night! i am afeard, being in night, all this is but a dream, too flattering sweet to be substantial.", "three words, dear romeo, and good night indeed. if that thy bent of love be honorable, thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow by one that i'll procure to come to thee where and what time thou wilt perform the rite, and all my fortunes at thy foot i'll lay and follow thee my lord throughout the world.", "madam!", "i come, anon. but if thou mean'st not well, i do beseech thee", "madam!"], ["by and by, i come. to cease thy strife and leave me to my grief. tomorrow will i send.", "so thrive my soul", "a thousand times good night!", "a thousand times the worse to want thy light. love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books, but love from love, toward school with heavy looks.", "hist! romeo, hist! oh, for a falconer's voice, to lure this tassel-gentle back again! bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud, else would i tear the cave where echo lies, and make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine, with repetition of \"my romeo!\"", "it is my soul that calls upon my name. how silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night, like softest music to attending ears!"], ["romeo!", "my nyas?", "what o'clock tomorrow shall i send to thee?", "by the hour of nine.", "i will not fail. 'tis twenty year till then. i have forgot why i did call thee back.", "let me stand here till thou remember it.", "i shall forget, to have thee still stand there, remembering how i love thy company.", "and i'll still stay, to have thee still forget, forgetting any other home but this.", "'tis almost morning. i would have thee gone. and yet no further than a wanton's bird, that lets it hop a little from his hand like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves, and with a silken thread plucks it back again, so loving-jealous of his liberty.", "i would i were thy bird.", "sweet, so would i. yet i should kill thee with much cherishing. good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrow that i shall say good night till it be morrow."], ["sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast. would i were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest. hence will i to my ghostly friar's close cell, his help to crave and my dear hap to tell."], ["the gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night, checkering the eastern clouds with streaks of light, and fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels from forth day's path and titan's fiery wheels. now, ere the sun advance his burning eye, the day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry, i must upfill this osier cage of ours with baleful weeds and precious-juicd flowers. the earth, that's nature's mother, is her tomb. what is her burying, grave that is her womb. and from her womb children of divers kind we sucking on her natural bosom find, many for many virtues excellent, none but for some and yet all different. oh, mickle is the powerful grace that lies in herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities. for naught so vile that on the earth doth live but to the earth some special good doth give. nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse. virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied, and vice sometime by action dignified.", "within the infant rind of this small flower poison hath residence and medicine power. for this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part; being tasted, stays all senses with the heart. two such opposd kings encamp them still, in man as well as herbs grace and rude will."], ["and where the worser is predominant, full soon the canker death eats up that plant.", "good morrow, father.", "benedicite. what early tongue so sweet saluteth me? young son, it argues a distempered head so soon to bid good morrow to thy bed. care keeps his watch in every old man's eye, and where care lodges, sleep will never lie. but where unbruisd youth with unstuffed brain doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign. therefore thy earliness doth me assure thou art uproused by some distemperature. or if not so, then here i hit it right: our romeo hath not been in bed tonight.", "that last is true. the sweeter rest was mine.", "god pardon sin! wast thou with rosaline?", "with rosaline, my ghostly father? no. i have forgot that name and that name's woe.", "that's my good son. but where hast thou been, then?", "i'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again. i have been feasting with mine enemy, where on a sudden one hath wounded me, that's by me wounded. both our remedies within thy help and holy physic lies. i bear no hatred, blessd man, for, lo, my intercession likewise steads my foe."], ["be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift. riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.", "then plainly know my heart's dear love is set on the fair daughter of rich capulet. as mine on hers, so hers is set on mine, and all combined, save what thou must combine by holy marriage. when and where and how we met, we wooed and made exchange of vow, i'll tell thee as we pass, but this i pray: that thou consent to marry us today.", "holy saint francis, what a change is here! is rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear, so soon forsaken? young men's love then lies not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes. jesu maria, what a deal of brine hath washed thy sallow cheeks for rosaline! how much salt water thrown away in waste to season love that of it doth not taste! the sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears, thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears. lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit of an old tear that is not washed off yet. if e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine, thou and these woes were all for rosaline. and art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then: women may fall when there's no strength in men.", "thou chid'st me oft for loving rosaline.", "for doting, not for loving, pupil mine.", "and badest me bury love."], ["not in a grave, to lay one in, another out to have.", "i pray thee, chide not. her i love now doth grace for grace and love for love allow. the other did not so.", "oh, she knew well thy love did read by rote, that could not spell. but come, young waverer, come, go with me, in one respect i'll thy assistant be, for this alliance may so happy prove to turn your households' rancor to pure love.", "oh, let us hence. i stand on sudden haste.", "wisely and slow. they stumble that run fast."], ["where the devil should this romeo be? came he not home tonight?", "not to his father's. i spoke with his man.", "why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that rosaline, torments him so, that he will sure run mad.", "tybalt, the kinsman to old capulet, hath sent a letter to his father's house.", "a challenge, on my life.", "romeo will answer it.", "any man that can write may answer a letter.", "nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being dared.", "alas, poor romeo! he is already dead, stabbed with a white wench's black eye, shot through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt shaft. and is he a man to encounter tybalt?", "why, what is tybalt?", "more than prince of cats. oh, he's the courageous captain of compliments. he fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion. he rests his minim rests one, two, and the third in your bosom. the very butcher of a silk button, a duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause. ah, the immortal , the , the"], ["the what?", "the pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasmines, these new tuners of accents! \"by jesu, a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good whore!\" why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these \"pardon me's,\" who stand so much on the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? oh, their bones, their bones!", "here comes romeo, here comes romeo.", "without his roe, like a dried herring. o flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! now is he for the numbers that petrarch flowed in. laura to his lady was but a kitchen-wench marry, she had a better love to berhyme her dido a dowdy, cleopatra a gypsy, helen and hero hildings and harlots, thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose. signior romeo, there's a french salutation to your french slop. you gave us the counterfeit fairly last night."], ["good morrow to you both. what counterfeit did i give you?", "the slip, sir, the slip. can you not conceive?", "pardon, good mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.", "that's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.", "meaning \"to curtsy\"?", "thou hast most kindly hit it.", "a most courteous exposition.", "nay, i am the very pink of courtesy.", "pink for flower.", "right."], ["why, then is my pump well flowered.", "sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing solely singular.", "o single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness.", "come between us, good benvolio. my wits faints.", "switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or i'll cry a match.", "nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, i am done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than, i am sure, i have in my whole five. was i with you there for the goose?", "thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there for the goose.", "i will bite thee by the ear for that jest.", "nay, good goose, bite not.", "thy wit is a very bitter sweeting. it is a most sharp sauce.", "and is it not well served into a sweet goose?", "oh, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad!"], ["i stretch it out for that word \"broad,\" which, added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.", "why, is not this better now than groaning for love? now art thou sociable. now art thou romeo. now art thou what thou art by art as well as by nature, for this driveling love is like a great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.", "stop there, stop there.", "thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.", "thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.", "oh, thou art deceived. i would have made it short, for i was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.", "here's goodly gear.", "a sail, a sail!", "two, two a shirt and a smock.", "peter!"], ["anon!", "my fan, peter.", "good, peter, to hide her face, for her fan's the fairer face.", "god ye good morrow, gentlemen.", "god ye good e'en, fair gentlewoman.", "is it good e'en?", "'tis no less, i tell you, for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.", "out upon you! what a man are you?", "one, gentlewoman, that god hath made, himself to mar.", "by my troth, it is well said. \"for himself to mar,\" quoth he? gentlemen, can any of you tell me where i may find the young romeo?", "i can tell you, but young romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. i am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.", "you say well."], ["yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith, wisely, wisely.", "if you be he, sir, i desire some confidence with you.", "she will indite him to some supper.", "a bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!", "what hast thou found?", "no hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie that is, something stale and hoar ere it be spent.", "", "romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll to dinner, thither.", "i will follow you."], ["farewell, ancient lady. farewell, lady, lady, lady.", "i pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery?", "a gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.", "an he speak any thing against me, i'll take him down, an he were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks. and if i cannot, i'll find those that shall. scurvy knave! i am none of his flirt-gills. i am none of his skains-mates. peter and thou must stand by, too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?", "i saw no man use you at his pleasure. if i had, my weapon should quickly have been out, i warrant you. i dare draw as soon as another man if i see occasion in a good quarrel and the law on my side.", "now, afore god, i am so vexed that every part about me quivers. scurvy knave! romeo pray you, sir, a word. and as i told you, my young lady bid me inquire you out. what she bade me say, i will keep to myself. but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say. for the gentlewoman is young, and therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing."], ["nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. i protest unto thee", "good heart, and i' faith, i will tell her as much. lord, lord, she will be a joyful woman.", "what wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.", "i will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as i take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.", "bid her devise some means to come to shrift this afternoon. and there she shall at friar lawrence' cell be shrived and married. here is for thy pains.", "no, truly, sir. not a penny.", "go to. i say you shall.", "this afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.", "and stay, good nurse. behind the abbey wall within this hour my man shall be with thee and bring thee cords made like a tackled stair, which to the high top-gallant of my joy must be my convoy in the secret night. farewell. be trusty, and i'll quit thy pains. farewell. commend me to thy mistress."], ["now god in heaven bless thee! hark you, sir.", "what sayst thou, my dear nurse?", "is your man secret? did you ne'er hear say, \"two may keep counsel, putting one away\"?", "warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.", "well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. lord, lord! when 'twas a little prating thing. oh, there is a nobleman in town, one paris, that would fain lay knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him. i anger her sometimes and tell her that paris is the properer man. but, i'll warrant you, when i say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. doth not and begin both with a letter?", "ay, nurse, what of that? both with an .", "ah, mocker, that's the dog's name. is for the no, i know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.", "commend me to thy lady.", "ay, a thousand times. peter!", "anon!", "before and apace."], ["the clock struck nine when i did send the nurse. in half an hour she promised to return. perchance she cannot meet him. that's not so. oh, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts, which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams, driving back shadows over louring hills. therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw love and therefore hath the wind-swift cupid wings. now is the sun upon the highmost hill of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve is three long hours, yet she is not come. had she affections and warm youthful blood, she would be as swift in motion as a ball. my words would bandy her to my sweet love, and his to me. but old folks, many feign as they were dead, unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.", "o god, she comes. o honey nurse, what news? hast thou met with him? send thy man away.", "peter, stay at the gate.", "now, good sweet nurse o lord, why look'st thou sad? though news be sad, yet tell them merrily. if good, thou shamest the music of sweet news by playing it to me with so sour a face."], ["i am aweary. give me leave awhile. fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have i!", "i would thou hadst my bones and i thy news. nay, come, i pray thee, speak. good, good nurse, speak.", "jesu, what haste! can you not stay awhile? do you not see that i am out of breath?", "how art thou out of breath when thou hast breath to say to me that thou art out of breath? the excuse that thou dost make in this delay is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. is thy news good, or bad? answer to that. say either, and i'll stay the circumstance. let me be satisfied. is 't good or bad?", "well, you have made a simple choice. you know not how to choose a man. romeo! no, not he, though his face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels all men's, and for a hand and a foot and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. he is not the flower of courtesy, but, i'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. go thy ways, wench. serve god. what, have you dined at home?", "no, no. but all this did i know before. what says he of our marriage? what of that?", "lord, how my head aches! what a head have i! it beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. my back a' t' other side. ah, my back, my back! beshrew your heart for sending me about, to catch my death with jaunting up and down!"], ["i' faith, i am sorry that thou art not well. sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?", "your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, i warrant, a virtuous where is your mother?", "where is my mother? why, she is within. where should she be? how oddly thou repliest! \"your love says, like an honest gentleman, 'where is your mother?'\"", "o god's lady dear, are you so hot? marry, come up, i trow. is this the poultice for my aching bones? henceforward do your messages yourself.", "here's such a coil. come, what says romeo?", "have you got leave to go to shrift today?", "i have.", "then hie you hence to friar lawrence's cell. there stays a husband to make you a wife. now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks. they'll be in scarlet straight at any news. hie you to church. i must another way to fetch a ladder, by the which your love must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark. i am the drudge and toil in your delight, but you shall bear the burden soon at night. go. i'll to dinner. hie you to the cell."], ["hie to high fortune! honest nurse, farewell."], ["so smile the heavens upon this holy act that after-hours with sorrow chide us not.", "amen, amen. but come what sorrow can, it cannot countervail the exchange of joy that one short minute gives me in her sight. do thou but close our hands with holy words, then love-devouring death do what he dare; it is enough i may but call her mine.", "these violent delights have violent ends and in their triumph die, like fire and powder, which, as they kiss, consume. the sweetest honey is loathsome in his own deliciousness and in the taste confounds the appetite. therefore love moderately. long love doth so. too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.", "here comes the lady. oh, so light a foot will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint. a lover may bestride the gossamers that idles in the wanton summer air, and yet not fall. so light is vanity.", "good even to my ghostly confessor.", "romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both."], ["as much to him, else is his thanks too much.", "ah, juliet, if the measure of thy joy be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more to blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath this neighbor air, and let rich music's tongue unfold the imagined happiness that both receive in either by this dear encounter.", "conceit, more rich in matter than in words, brags of his substance, not of ornament. they are but beggars that can count their worth. but my true love is grown to such excess i cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.", "come, come with me, and we will make short work. for, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone till holy church incorporate two in one."], ["i pray thee, good mercutio, let's retire. the day is hot; the capulets, abroad; and if we meet we shall not 'scape a brawl, for now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.", "thou art like one of those fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says \"god send me no need of thee!\" and, by the operation of the second cup, draws it on the drawer when indeed there is no need.", "am i like such a fellow?", "come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.", "and what to?", "nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. thou, why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. what eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. thou hast quarreled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before easter? with another, for tying his new shoes with old ribbon? and yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling!"], ["an i were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.", "the fee simple? o simple!", "by my head, here comes the capulets.", "by my heel, i care not.", "follow me close, for i will speak to them. gentlemen, good e'en. a word with one of you.", "and but one word with one of us? couple it with something. make it a word and a blow.", "you shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.", "could you not take some occasion without giving?", "mercutio, thou consort'st with romeo."], ["consort? what, dost thou make us minstrels? an thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. here's my fiddlestick. here's that shall make you dance. zounds, \"consort\"!", "we talk here in the public haunt of men. either withdraw unto some private place, and reason coldly of your grievances, or else depart. here all eyes gaze on us.", "men's eyes were made to look and let them gaze. i will not budge for no man's pleasure, i.", "well, peace be with you, sir. here comes my man.", "but i'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery. marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower. your worship in that sense may call him \"man.\"", "romeo, the love i bear thee can afford no better term than this: thou art a villain.", "tybalt, the reason that i have to love thee doth much excuse the appertaining rage to such a greeting. villain am i none. therefore, farewell. i see thou know'st me not.", "boy, this shall not excuse the injuries that thou hast done me. therefore turn and draw."], ["i do protest i never injured thee, but love thee better than thou canst devise, till thou shalt know the reason of my love. and so, good capulet which name i tender as dearly as my own be satisfied.", "o calm dishonourable, vile submission! carries it away. tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?", "what wouldst thou have with me?", "good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine lives, that i mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight. will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.", "i am for you.", "gentle mercutio, put thy rapier up.", "come, sir, your .", "draw, benvolio. beat down their weapons. gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage. tybalt, mercutio! the prince expressly hath forbidden bandying in verona streets. hold, tybalt! good mercutio!"], ["away, tybalt.", "i am hurt. a plague o' both your houses! i am sped. is he gone and hath nothing?", "what, art thou hurt?", "ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. marry, 'tis enough. where is my page? go, villain, fetch a surgeon.", "courage, man. the hurt cannot be much.", "no, 'tis not so deep as a well nor so wide as a church-door, but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. i am peppered, i warrant, for this world. a plague o' both your houses! zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a villain that fights by the book of arithmetic! why the devil came you between us? i was hurt under your arm.", "i thought all for the best."], ["help me into some house, benvolio, or i shall faint. a plague o' both your houses! they have made worms' meat of me. i have it, and soundly too. your houses!", "this gentleman, the prince's near ally, my very friend, hath got his mortal hurt in my behalf. my reputation stained with tybalt's slander. tybalt, that an hour hath been my kinsman! o sweet juliet, thy beauty hath made me effeminate and in my temper softened valor's steel!", "o romeo, romeo, brave mercutio is dead! that gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds, which too untimely here did scorn the earth.", "this day's black fate on more days doth depend. this but begins the woe others must end.", "here comes the furious tybalt back again.", "alive in triumph and mercutio slain! away to heaven, respective lenity, and fire-eyed fury be my conduct now. now, tybalt, take the \"villain\" back again that late thou gavest me, for mercutio's soul is but a little way above our heads, staying for thine to keep him company. either thou or i, or both, must go with him."], ["thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here shalt with him hence.", "this shall determine that.", "romeo, away, be gone! the citizens are up, and tybalt slain. stand not amazed. the prince will doom thee death if thou art taken. hence, be gone, away!", "oh, i am fortune's fool!", "why dost thou stay?", "which way ran he that killed mercutio? tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?", "there lies that tybalt.", "tybalt up, sir, go with me. i charge thee in the prince's name, obey."], ["where are the vile beginners of this fray?", "o noble prince, i can discover all the unlucky manage of this fatal brawl. there lies the man, slain by young romeo, that slew thy kinsman, brave mercutio.", "tybalt, my cousin! o my brother's child! o prince! o cousin! husband! oh, the blood is spilled of my dear kinsman! prince, as thou art true, for blood of ours shed blood of montague. o cousin, cousin!", "benvolio, who began this bloody fray?", "tybalt here slain, whom romeo's hand did slay. romeo, that spoke him fair, bade him bethink how nice the quarrel was and urged withal your high displeasure. all this uttered with gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed, could not take truce with the unruly spleen of tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts with piercing steel at bold mercutio's breast, who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point, and, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats cold death aside and with the other sends it back to tybalt, whose dexterity, retorts it. romeo, he cries aloud, \"hold, friends! friends, part!\" and, swifter than his tongue, his agile arm beats down their fatal points, and 'twixt them rushes underneath whose arm an envious thrust from tybalt hit the life of stout mercutio, and then tybalt fled."], ["but by and by comes back to romeo, who had but newly entertained revenge, and to 't they go like lightning, for ere i could draw to part them was stout tybalt slain. and, as he fell, did romeo turn and fly. this is the truth, or let benvolio die.", "he is a kinsman to the montague. affection makes him false. he speaks not true. some twenty of them fought in this black strife, and all those twenty could but kill one life. i beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give. romeo slew tybalt. romeo must not live.", "romeo slew him; he slew mercutio. who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?", "not romeo, prince, he was mercutio's friend. his fault concludes but what the law should end, the life of tybalt.", "and for that offence immediately we do exile him hence. i have an interest in your hearts' proceeding. my blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding. but i'll amerce you with so strong a fine that you shall all repent the loss of mine. i will be deaf to pleading and excuses. nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses, therefore use none. let romeo hence in haste, else, when he's found, that hour is his last. bear hence this body and attend our will. mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill."], ["gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, toward phoebus' lodging. such a wagoner as phaeton would whip you to the west and bring in cloudy night immediately. spread thy close curtain, love-performing night, that runaways' eyes may wink, and romeo leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen. lovers can see to do their amorous rites by their own beauties, or, if love be blind, it best agrees with night. come, civil night, thou sober-suited matron, all in black, and learn me how to lose a winning match played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods. hood my unmanned blood bating in my cheeks, with thy black mantle, till strange love, grow bold, think true love acted simple modesty. come, night. come, romeo. come, thou day in night, for thou wilt lie upon the wings of night whiter than new snow upon a raven's back. come, gentle night, come, loving, black-browed night, give me my romeo. and when i shall die, take him and cut him out in little stars, and he will make the face of heaven so fine that all the world will be in love with night and pay no worship to the garish sun. oh, i have bought the mansion of a love, but not possessed it, and though i am sold, not yet enjoyed. so tedious is this day as is the night before some festival to an impatient child that hath new robes and may not wear them."], ["oh, here comes my nurse, and she brings news, and every tongue that speaks but romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence. now, nurse, what news? what hast thou there? the cords that romeo bid thee fetch?", "ay, ay, the cords.", "ay me, what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?", "ah, welladay! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead! we are undone, lady, we are undone! alack the day! he's gone, he's killed, he's dead!", "can heaven be so envious?", "romeo can, though heaven cannot. o romeo, romeo! who ever would have thought it? romeo!", "what devil art thou that dost torment me thus? this torture should be roared in dismal hell. hath romeo slain himself? say thou but \"ay,\" and that bare vowel shall poison more than the death-darting eye of cockatrice. i am not i if there be such an or those eyes shut that makes thee answer \"ay.\" if he be slain, say \"ay,\" or if not, \"no.\" brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.", "i saw the wound, i saw it with mine eyes god save the mark! here on his manly breast. a piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse. pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood, all in gore blood. i swoond at the sight."], ["o, break, my hear, poor bankrupt, break at once! to prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty. vile earth, to earth resign. end motion here, and thou and romeo press one heavy bier.", "o tybalt, tybalt, the best friend i had! o courteous tybalt! honest gentleman! that ever i should live to see thee dead.", "what storm is this that blows so contrary? is romeo slaughtered, and is tybalt dead? my dearest cousin and my dearer lord? then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom! for who is living if those two are gone?", "tybalt is gone, and romeo banishd. romeo that killed him he is banishd.", "o god, did romeo's hand shed tybalt's blood?", "it did, it did. alas the day, it did.", "o serpent heart hid with a flowering face! did ever dragon keep so fair a cave? beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical! dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb! despisd substance of divinest show, just opposite to what thou justly seem'st. a damnd saint, an honorable villain! o nature, what hadst thou to do in hell when thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend in moral paradise of such sweet flesh? was ever book containing such vile matter so fairly bound? oh, that deceit should dwell in such a gorgeous palace!"], ["there's no trust, no faith, no honesty in men. all perjured, all forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers. ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae. these griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old. shame come to romeo!", "blistered be thy tongue for such a wish! he was not born to shame. upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit, for 'tis a throne where honor may be crowned. sole monarch of the universal earth, oh, what a beast was i to chide at him!", "will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?", "shall i speak ill of him that is my husband? ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name, when i, thy three hours' wife, have mangled it? but wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin? that villain cousin would have killed my husband. back, foolish tears, back to your native spring. your tributary drops belong to woe, which you, mistaking, offer up to joy. my husband lives, that tybalt would have slain, and tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband. all this is comfort. wherefore weep i then? some word there was, worser than tybalt's death, that murdered me. i would forget it fain, but oh, it presses to my memory, like damnd guilty deeds to sinners' minds. \"tybalt is dead, and romeo banishd.\""], ["that \"banishd,\" that one word \"banishd\" hath slain ten thousand tybalts. tybalt's death was woe enough, if it had ended there. or, if sour woe delights in fellowship and needly will be ranked with other griefs, why followed not, when she said \"tybalt's dead,\" \"thy father\" or \"thy mother,\" nay, or both, which modern lamentations might have moved? but with a rearward following tybalt's death, \"romeo is banishd.\" to speak that word, is father, mother, tybalt, romeo, juliet, all slain, all dead. \"romeo is banishd.\" there is no end, no limit, measure, bound, in that word's death. no words can that woe sound. where is my father and my mother, nurse?", "weeping and wailing over tybalt's corse. will you go to them? i will bring you thither.", "wash they his wounds with tears? mine shall be spent when theirs are dry, for romeo's banishment. take up those cords. poor ropes, you are beguiled, both you and i, for romeo is exiled. he made you for a highway to my bed, but i, a maid, die maiden-widowd. come, cords. come, nurse. i'll to my wedding bed. and death, not romeo, take my maidenhead!", "hie to your chamber. i'll find romeo to comfort you. i wot well where he is. hark ye, your romeo will be here at night. i'll to him. he is hid at lawrence' cell."], ["nurse o, find him! give this ring to my true knight, and bid him come to take his last farewell."], ["romeo, come forth. come forth, thou fearful man. affliction is enamoured of thy parts, and thou art wedded to calamity.", "father, what news? what is the prince's doom? what sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand that i yet know not?", "too familiar is my dear son with such sour company. i bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.", "what less than doomsday is the prince's doom?", "a gentler judgment vanished from his lips: not body's death, but body's banishment.", "ha, banishment! be merciful, say \"death,\" for exile hath more terror in his look, much more than death. do not say \"banishment.\"", "hence from verona art thou banishd. be patient, for the world is broad and wide.", "there is no world without verona walls but purgatory, torture, hell itself. hence \"banishd\" is banished from the world, and world's exile is death. then \"banishd,\""], ["is death mistermed. calling death \"banishment,\" thou cutt'st my head off with a golden ax and smilest upon the stroke that murders me.", "o deadly sin! o rude unthankfulness! thy fault our law calls death, but the kind prince, taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law, and turned that black word \"death\" to \"banishment.\" this is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.", "'tis torture and not mercy. heaven is here, where juliet lives, and every cat and dog and little mouse, every unworthy thing, live here in heaven and may look on her, but romeo may not. more validity, more honorable state, more courtship lives in carrion flies than romeo. they may seize on the white wonder of dear juliet's hand and steal immortal blessing from her lips, who even in pure and vestal modesty, still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin. but romeo may not. he is banishd. flies may do this, but i from this must fly. they are free men, but i am banishd. and sayst thou yet that exile is not death? hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground knife, no sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean, but \"banishd\" to kill me? \"banishd\"! o friar, the damnd use that word in hell. howling attends it. how hast thou the heart, being a divine, a ghostly confessor, a sin-absolver, and my friend professed, to mangle me with that word \"banishd\"?", "thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak."], ["oh, thou wilt speak again of banishment.", "i'll give thee armor to keep off that word adversity's sweet milk, philosophy to comfort thee though thou art banishd.", "yet \"banishd\"? hang up philosophy! unless philosophy can make a juliet, displant a town, reverse a prince's doom, it helps not, it prevails not. talk no more.", "oh, then i see that madmen have no ears.", "how should they, when that wise men have no eyes?", "let me dispute with thee of thy estate.", "thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel. wert thou as young as i, juliet thy love, an hour but married, tybalt murderd, doting like me, and like me banishd, then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair and fall upon the ground, as i do now, taking the measure of an unmade grave.", "arise. one knocks. good romeo, hide thyself."], ["not i, unless the breath of heartsick groans, mistlike, infold me from the search of eyes.", "hark, how they knock! who's there? romeo, arise. thou wilt be taken. stay awhile. stand up.", "run to my study. by and by! god's will, what simpleness is this! i come, i come.", "who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?", "let me come in, and you shall know my errand. i come from lady juliet.", "welcome then.", "o holy friar, o, tell me, holy friar, where is my lady's lord? where's romeo?"], ["there on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.", "oh, he is even in my mistress' case, just in her case. o woeful sympathy, piteous predicament! even so lies she, blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. stand up, stand up. stand, an you be a man. for juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand. why should you fall into so deep an o?", "nurse!", "ah sir, ah sir. death's the end of all.", "spakest thou of juliet? how is it with her? doth she not think me an old murderer, now i have stained the childhood of our joy with blood removed but little from her own? where is she? and how doth she? and what says my concealed lady to our canceled love?", "oh, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps, and now falls on her bed, and then starts up, and \"tybalt\" calls, and then on romeo cries, and then down falls again.", "as if that name, shot from the deadly level of a gun, did murder her, as that name's cursed hand murdered her kinsman. o, tell me, friar, tell me, in what vile part of this anatomy doth my name lodge? tell me, that i may sack the hateful mansion."], ["hold thy desperate hand. art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art. thy tears are womanish. thy wild acts denote the unreasonable fury of a beast. unseemly woman in a seeming man, and ill-beseeming beast in seeming both! thou hast amazed me. by my holy order, i thought thy disposition better tempered. hast thou slain tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself, and slay thy lady that in thy life lives by doing damnd hate upon thyself? why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth? since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet in thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose? fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit, which, like a usurer, abound'st in all and usest none in that true use indeed which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit. thy noble shape is but a form of wax, digressing from the valor of a man; thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury, killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish; thy wit, that ornament to shape and love, misshapen in the conduct of them both, like powder in a skill-less soldier's flask, is set afire by thine own ignorance; and thou dismembered with thine own defence. what, rouse thee, man! thy juliet is alive, for whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead there art thou happy. tybalt would kill thee, but thou slew'st tybalt there art thou happy. the law that threatened death becomes thy friend and turns it to exile there art thou happy. a pack of blessings light upon thy back, happiness courts thee in her best array,"], ["but, like a misbehaved and sullen wench, thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love. take heed, take heed, for such die miserable. go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed. ascend her chamber, hence, and comfort her. but look thou stay not till the watch be set, for then thou canst not pass to mantua, where thou shalt live, till we can find a time to blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back with twenty hundred thousand times more joy than thou went'st forth in lamentation. go before, nurse. commend me to thy lady, and bid her hasten all the house to bed, which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto. romeo is coming.", "o lord, i could have stayed here all the night to hear good counsel. oh, what learning is! my lord, i'll tell my lady you will come.", "do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.", "here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir. romeo juliet hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.", "how well my comfort is revived by this!"], ["go hence. good night. and here stands all your state: either be gone before the watch be set, or by the break of day disguised from hence. sojourn in mantua. i'll find out your man, and he shall signify from time to time every good hap to you that chances here. give me thy hand. 'tis late. farewell, good night.", "but that a joy past joy calls out on me, it were a grief so brief to part with thee. farewell."], ["things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily, that we have had no time to move our daughter. look you, she loved her kinsman tybalt dearly, and so did i. well, we were born to die. 'tis very late. she'll not come down tonight. i promise you, but for your company, i would have been abed an hour ago.", "these times of woe afford no time to woo. madam, good night. commend me to your daughter.", "i will, and know her mind early tomorrow. tonight she is mewed up to her heaviness.", "sir paris, i will make a desperate tender of my child's love. i think she will be ruled in all respects by me. nay, more, i doubt it not. wife, go you to her ere you go to bed. acquaint her here of my son paris' love, and bid her, mark you me, on wednesday next but, soft! what day is this?", "monday, my lord.", "monday! ha, ha. well, wednesday is too soon, o' thursday let it be. o' thursday, tell her, she shall be married to this noble earl. will you be ready? do you like this haste? we'll keep no great ado, a friend or two. for, hark you, tybalt being slain so late, it may be thought we held him carelessly, being our kinsman, if we revel much. therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends, and there an end. but what say you to thursday?"], ["my lord, i would that thursday were tomorrow.", "well get you gone. o' thursday be it, then. go you to juliet ere you go to bed. prepare her, wife, against this wedding day. farewell, my lord. light to my chamber, ho! afore me! it is so very late, that we may call it early by and by. good night."], ["wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day. it was the nightingale, and not the lark, that pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear. nightly she sings on yon pomegranate tree. believe me, love, it was the nightingale.", "it was the lark, the herald of the morn, no nightingale. look, love, what envious streaks do lace the severing clouds in yonder east. night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops. i must be gone and live, or stay and die.", "yon light is not daylight, i know it, i. it is some meteor that the sun exhales to be to thee this night a torchbearer, and light thee on thy way to mantua. therefore stay yet. thou need'st not to be gone.", "let me be ta'en. let me be put to death. i am content, so thou wilt have it so. i'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye. 'tis but the pale reflex of cynthia's brow. nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat the vaulty heaven so high above our heads. i have more care to stay than will to go. come, death, and welcome! juliet wills it so. how is 't, my soul? let's talk. it is not day."], ["it is, it is. hie hence! be gone, away! it is the lark that sings so out of tune, straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps. some say the lark makes sweet division. this doth not so, for she divideth us. some say the lark and loathd toad change eyes. oh, now i would they had changed voices too, since arm from arm that voice doth us affray, hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day. o, now be gone. more light and light it grows.", "more light and light, more dark and dark our woes!", "madam.", "nurse?", "your lady mother is coming to your chamber. the day is broke. be wary, look about.", "then, window, let day in and let life out.", "farewell, farewell. one kiss, and i'll descend."], ["art thou gone so, love, lord? ay, husband, friend, i must hear from thee every day in the hour, for in a minute there are many days. oh, by this count i shall be much in years ere i again behold my romeo.", "farewell! i will omit no opportunity that may convey my greetings, love, to thee.", "oh, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?", "i doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve for sweet discourses in our time to come.", "o god, i have an ill-divining soul. methinks i see thee now, thou art so low as one dead in the bottom of a tomb. either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.", "and trust me, love, in my eye so do you. dry sorrow drinks our blood. adieu, adieu!", "o fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle. if thou art fickle, what dost thou with him that is renowned for faith? be fickle, fortune, for then, i hope, thou wilt not keep him long, but send him back.", "ho, daughter, are you up?"], ["who is 't that calls? is it my lady mother? is she not down so late or up so early? what unaccustomed cause procures her hither?", "why, how now, juliet?", "madam, i am not well.", "evermore weeping for your cousin's death? what, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears? an if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live. therefore, have done. some grief shows much of love, but much of grief shows still some want of wit.", "yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.", "so shall you feel the loss, but not the friend which you weep for.", "feeling so the loss, cannot choose but ever weep the friend.", "well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death, as that the villain lives which slaughtered him.", "what villain, madam?", "that same villain, romeo."], ["villain and he be many miles asunder. lady capulet god pardon him! i do, with all my heart, and yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.", "that is because the traitor murderer lives.", "ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands. would none but i might venge my cousin's death!", "we will have vengeance for it, fear thou not. then weep no more. i'll send to one in mantua, where that same banished runagate doth live, shall give him such an unaccustomed dram that he shall soon keep tybalt company. and then, i hope, thou wilt be satisfied.", "indeed, i never shall be satisfied with romeo, till i behold him dead is my poor heart for a kinsman vexed. madam, if you could find out but a man to bear a poison, i would temper it, that romeo should, upon receipt thereof, soon sleep in quiet. oh, how my heart abhors to hear him named, and cannot come to him. to wreak the love i bore my cousin upon his body that slaughtered him!", "find thou the means, and i'll find such a man. but now i'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.", "and joy comes well in such a needy time. what are they, beseech your ladyship?"], ["well, well, thou hast a careful father, child. one who, to put thee from thy heaviness, hath sorted out a sudden day of joy that thou expect'st not, nor i looked not for.", "madam, in happy time, what day is that?", "marry, my child, early next thursday morn, the gallant, young, and noble gentleman, the county paris, at saint peter's church, shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.", "now, by saint peter's church and peter too, he shall not make me there a joyful bride. i wonder at this haste, that i must wed ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo. i pray you, tell my lord and father, madam, i will not marry yet. and when i do, i swear it shall be romeo, whom you know i hate, rather than paris. these are news indeed!", "here comes your father. tell him so yourself, and see how he will take it at your hands.", "when the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew, but for the sunset of my brother's son it rains downright. how now? a conduit, girl? what, still in tears, evermore showering? in one little body thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind, for still thy eyes, which i may call the sea, do ebb and flow with tears. the bark thy body is, sailing in this salt flood. the winds thy sighs, who, raging with thy tears, and they with them, without a sudden calm will overset thy tempest-tossd body. how now, wife? have you delivered to her our decree?"], ["ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks. i would the fool were married to her grave!", "soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife. how, will she none? doth she not give us thanks? is she not proud? doth she not count her blessed, unworthy as she is, that we have wrought so worthy a gentleman to be her bride?", "not proud you have, but thankful that you have. proud can i never be of what i hate, but thankful even for hate that is meant love.", "how, how, how, how? chopped logic! what is this? \"proud,\" and \"i thank you,\" and \"i thank you not,\" and yet \"not proud\"? mistress minion you, thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds, but fettle your fine joints 'gainst thursday next to go with paris to saint peter's church, or i will drag thee on a hurdle thither. out, you green sickness, carrion! out, you baggage! you tallow face!", "fie, fie! what, are you mad?", "good father, i beseech you on my knees, hear me with patience but to speak a word."], ["hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch! i tell thee what: get thee to church o' thursday, or never after look me in the face. speak not. reply not. do not answer me. my fingers itch. wife, we scarce thought us blest that god had lent us but this only child, but now i see this one is one too much and that we have a curse in having her. out on her, hilding!", "god in heaven bless her! you are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.", "and why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue, good prudence. smatter with your gossips, go.", "i speak no treason.", "oh, god 'i' good e'en.", "may not one speak?", "peace, you mumbling fool! utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl, for here we need it not.", "you are too hot.", "god's bread! it makes me mad. day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play, alone, in company, still my care hath been to have her matched. and having now provided a gentleman of noble parentage, of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly trained, stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts, proportioned as one's thought would wish a man and then to have a wretched puling fool, a whining mammet, in her fortune's tender, to answer \"i'll not wed,\" \"i cannot love,\" \"i am too young,\" \"i pray you, pardon me.\" but, an you will not wed, i'll pardon you. graze where you will, you shall not house with me. look to 't, think on 't, i do not use to jest. thursday is near. lay hand on heart, advise. an you be mine, i'll give you to my friend. an you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets, for, by my soul, i'll ne'er acknowledge thee, nor what is mine shall never do thee good. trust to 't, bethink you. i'll not be forsworn."], ["is there no pity sitting in the clouds that sees into the bottom of my grief? o sweet my mother, cast me not away! delay this marriage for a month, a week. or, if you do not, make the bridal bed in that dim monument where tybalt lies.", "talk not to me, for i'll not speak a word. do as thou wilt, for i have done with thee.", "o god! o nurse, how shall this be prevented? my husband is on earth, my faith in heaven. how shall that faith return again to earth, unless that husband send it me from heaven by leaving earth? comfort me. counsel me. alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems upon so soft a subject as myself. what sayst thou? hast thou not a word of joy? some comfort, nurse."], ["faith, here it is. romeo is banishd, and all the world to nothing that he dares ne'er come back to challenge you. or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth. then, since the case so stands as now it doth, i think it best you married with the county. oh, he's a lovely gentleman. romeo's a dishclout to him. an eagle, madam, hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye as paris hath. beshrew my very heart, i think you are happy in this second match, for it excels your first. or if it did not, your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were, as living here and you no use of him.", "speakest thou from thy heart?", "and from my soul too, else beshrew them both.", "amen!", "what?", "well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much. go in, and tell my lady i am gone, having displeased my father, to lawrence's cell to make confession and to be absolved.", "marry, i will, and this is wisely done."], ["ancient damnation! o most wicked fiend! is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn, or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue which she hath praised him with above compare so many thousand times? go, counselor. thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain. i'll to the friar to know his remedy. if all else fail, myself have power to die."], ["on thursday, sir? the time is very short.", "my father capulet will have it so, and i am nothing slow to slack his haste.", "you say you do not know the lady's mind. uneven is the course. i like it not.", "immoderately she weeps for tybalt's death, and therefore have i little talked of love, for venus smiles not in a house of tears. now, sir, her father counts it dangerous that she do give her sorrow so much sway, and in his wisdom hastes our marriage to stop the inundation of her tears which, too much minded by herself alone, may be put from her by society. now do you know the reason of this haste.", "i would i knew not why it should be slowed. look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.", "happily met, my lady and my wife.", "that may be, sir, when i may be a wife."], ["that \"may be\" must be, love, on thursday next.", "what must be shall be.", "that's a certain text.", "come you to make confession to this father?", "to answer that, i should confess to you.", "do not deny to him that you love me.", "i will confess to you that i love him.", "so will ye, i am sure, that you love me.", "if i do so, it will be of more price being spoke behind your back than to your face.", "poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.", "the tears have got small victory by that, for it was bad enough before their spite.", "thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.", "that is no slander, sir, which is a truth, and what i spake, i spake it to my face.", "thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.", "it may be so, for it is not mine own. are you at leisure, holy father, now, or shall i come to you at evening mass?"], ["my leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now. my lord, we must entreat the time alone.", "god shield i should disturb devotion! juliet, on thursday early will i rouse ye. till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.", "o, shut the door! and when thou hast done so, come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help.", "o juliet, i already know thy grief. it strains me past the compass of my wits. i hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it, on thursday next be married to this county.", "tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this, unless thou tell me how i may prevent it. if in thy wisdom thou canst give no help, do thou but call my resolution wise, and with this knife i'll help it presently. god joined my heart and romeo's, thou our hands. and ere this hand, by thee to romeo sealed, shall be the label to another deed, or my true heart with treacherous revolt turn to another, this shall slay them both. therefore out of thy long-experienced time, give me some present counsel, or, behold, 'twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife shall play the umpire, arbitrating that which the commission of thy years and art could to no issue of true honor bring. be not so long to speak. i long to die if what thou speak'st speak not of remedy."], ["hold, daughter. i do spy a kind of hope, which craves as desperate an execution as that is desperate which we would prevent. if, rather than to marry county paris, thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself, then is it likely thou wilt undertake a thing like death to chide away this shame, that copest with death himself to 'scape from it. an if thou darest, i'll give thee remedy.", "o, bid me leap, rather than marry paris, from off the battlements of yonder tower; or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears; or shut me nightly in a charnel house, o'ercovered quite with dead men's rattling bones, with reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls; or bid me go into a new-made grave and hide me with a dead man in his shroud things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble and i will do it without fear or doubt, to live an unstained wife to my sweet love.", "hold, then. go home, be merry. give consent to marry paris. wednesday is tomorrow. tomorrow night look that thou lie alone. let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber. take thou this vial, being then in bed, and this distilld liquor drink thou off, when presently through all thy veins shall run a cold and drowsy humor, for no pulse shall keep his native progress, but surcease. no warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest. the roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade to paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall like death when he shuts up the day of life. each part, deprived of supple government, shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death. and in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death thou shalt continue two and forty hours, and then awake as from a pleasant sleep. now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes to rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead. then, as the manner of our country is, in thy best robes uncovered on the bier thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault where all the kindred of the capulets lie. in the meantime, against thou shalt awake, shall romeo by my letters know our drift, and hither shall he come, and he and i will watch thy waking, and that very night shall romeo bear thee hence to mantua. and this shall free thee from this present shame, if no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear, abate thy valor in the acting it."], ["give me, give me! o, tell not me of fear!", "hold. get you gone. be strong and prosperous in this resolve. i'll send a friar with speed to mantua with my letters to thy lord.", "love give me strength, and strength shall help afford. farewell, dear father."], ["first servingman so many guests invite as here are writ.", "second servingman sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.", "you shall have none ill, sir, for i'll try if they can lick their fingers.", "how canst thou try them so?", "marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.", "go, be gone. we shall be much unfurnished for this time.", "what, is my daughter gone to friar lawrence?", "ay, forsooth.", "well, he may chance to do some good on her. a peevish self-willed harlotry it is."], ["see where she comes from shrift with merry look.", "how now, my headstrong? where have you been gadding?", "where i have learned me to repent the sin of disobedient opposition to you and your behests, and am enjoined by holy lawrence to fall prostrate here to beg your pardon. pardon, i beseech you! henceforward i am ever ruled by you.", "send for the county. go tell him of this. i'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.", "i met the youthful lord at lawrence' cell, and gave him what becomd love i might, not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.", "why, i am glad on 't. this is well. stand up.", "this is as 't should be. let me see the county. ay, marry, go, i say, and fetch him hither. now, afore god, this reverend holy friar! our whole city is much bound to him.", "nurse, will you go with me into my closet to help me sort such needful ornaments as you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?"], ["no, not till thursday. there is time enough.", "go, nurse. go with her. we'll to church tomorrow.", "we shall be short in our provision. 'tis now near night.", "tush, i will stir about, and all things shall be well, i warrant thee, wife. go thou to juliet, help to deck up her. i'll not to bed tonight. let me alone. i'll play the housewife for this once.", "what, ho? they are all forth? well, i will walk myself to county paris, to prepare him up against tomorrow. my heart is wondrous light since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed."], ["ay, those attires are best. but, gentle nurse, i pray thee, leave me to myself tonight, for i have need of many orisons to move the heavens to smile upon my state, which, well thou know'st, is cross and full of sin.", "what, are you busy, ho? need you my help?", "no, madam. we have culled such necessaries as are behooveful for our state tomorrow. so please you, let me now be left alone, and let the nurse this night sit up with you. for, i am sure, you have your hands full all in this so sudden business.", "good night. get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.", "farewell! god knows when we shall meet again. i have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins that almost freezes up the heat of life. i'll call them back again to comfort me. nurse! what should she do here?"], ["my dismal scene i needs must act alone. come, vial. what if this mixture do not work at all? shall i be married then tomorrow morning? no, no. this shall forbid it. lie thou there. what if it be a poison, which the friar subtly hath ministered to have me dead, lest in this marriage he should be dishonored because he married me before to romeo? i fear it is. and yet, methinks, it should not, for he hath still been tried a holy man. how if, when i am laid into the tomb, i wake before the time that romeo come to redeem me? there's a fearful point. shall i not, then, be stifled in the vault to whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in, and there die strangled ere my romeo comes? or, if i live, is it not very like the horrible conceit of death and night, together with the terror of the place as in a vault, an ancient receptacle, where for these many hundred years the bones of all my buried ancestors are packed; where bloody tybalt, yet but green in earth, lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say, at some hours in the night spirits resort ? alack, alack, is it not like that i, so early waking, what with loathsome smells, and shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth, that living mortals, hearing them, run mad ?"], ["oh, if i wake, shall i not be distraught, environd with all these hideous fears, and madly play with my forefather's joints, and pluck the mangled tybalt from his shroud, and, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone, as with a club, dash out my desperate brains? oh, look! methinks i see my cousin's ghost seeking out romeo, that did spit his body upon a rapier's point. stay, tybalt, stay! romeo, romeo, romeo! here's drink. i drink to thee."], ["hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.", "they call for dates and quinces in the pastry.", "come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crowed. the curfew bell hath rung. 'tis three o'clock. look to the baked meats, good angelica. spare not for the cost.", "go, you cot-quean, go. get you to bed, faith. you'll be sick tomorrow for this night's watching.", "no, not a whit, what. i have watched ere now all night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.", "ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time, but i will watch you from such watching now.", "a jealous hood, a jealous hood!", "now, fellow, what is there?"], ["things for the cook, sir, but i know not what.", "make haste, make haste, sirrah.", "second servingman fetch drier logs. call peter. he will show thee where they are.", "i have a head, sir, that will find out logs, and never trouble peter for the matter.", "mass, and well said. a merry whoreson, ha! thou shalt be loggerhead. good faith, 'tis day. the county will be here with music straight, for so he said he would. i hear him near.", "nurse! wife! what, ho? what, nurse, i say!", "go waken juliet. go and trim her up. i'll go and chat with paris. hie, make haste, make haste. the bridegroom he is come already. make haste, i say."], ["mistress! what, mistress! juliet! fast, i warrant her, she. why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed. why, love, i say. madam! sweet-heart! why, bride! what, not a word? you take your pennyworths now. sleep for a week, for the next night, i warrant, the county paris hath set up his rest that you shall rest but little. god forgive me, marry, and amen. how sound is she asleep! i must needs wake her. madam, madam, madam! ay, let the county take you in your bed. he'll fright you up, i' faith. will it not be? what, dressed and in your clothes, and down again? i must needs wake you. lady, lady, lady! alas, alas! help, help! my lady's dead! oh, welladay, that ever i was born! some aqua vitae, ho! my lord! my lady!", "what noise is here?", "o lamentable day!", "what is the matter?", "look, look. o heavy day!"], ["o me, o me! my child, my only life, revive, look up, or i will die with thee! help, help! call help.", "for shame, bring juliet forth. her lord is come.", "she's dead, deceased, she's dead. alack the day!", "alack the day. she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!", "ha? let me see her. out, alas! she's cold. her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff. life and these lips have long been separated. death lies on her like an untimely frost upon the sweetest flower of all the field.", "o lamentable day!", "o woeful time.", "death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail, ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.", "come, is the bride ready to go to church?", "ready to go, but never to return. o son! the night before thy wedding day hath death lain with thy wife. there she lies, flower as she was, deflowered by him."], ["death is my son-in-law. death is my heir. my daughter he hath wedded. i will die, and leave him all. life, living, all is death's.", "have i thought long to see this morning's face, and doth it give me such a sight as this?", "accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day! most miserable hour that e'er time saw in lasting labor of his pilgrimage. but one, poor one, one poor and loving child, but one thing to rejoice and solace in, and cruel death hath catched it from my sight!", "o woe! o woeful, woeful, woeful day! most lamentable day, most woeful day that ever, ever, i did yet behold! o day, o day, o day, o hateful day! never was seen so black a day as this. o woeful day, o woeful day!", "beguiled, divorcd, wrongd, spited, slain! most detestable death, by thee beguiled, by cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown! o love! o life! not life, but love in death.", "despised, distressd, hated, martyred, killed! uncomfortable time, why camest thou now to murder, murder our solemnity? o child, o child! my soul, and not my child! dead art thou! alack, my child is dead, and with my child my joys are buried.", "peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not in these confusions. heaven and yourself had part in this fair maid. now heaven hath all,"], ["and all the better is it for the maid. your part in her you could not keep from death, but heaven keeps his part in eternal life. the most you sought was her promotion, for 'twas your heaven she should be advanced. and weep ye now, seeing she is advanced above the clouds, as high as heaven itself? oh, in this love, you love your child so ill that you run mad, seeing that she is well. she's not well married that lives married long, but she's best married that dies married young. dry up your tears and stick your rosemary on this fair corse, and, as the custom is, and in her best array, bear her to church. for though some nature bids us all lament, yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.", "all things that we ordained festival turn from their office to black funeral. our instruments to melancholy bells, our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast. our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change, our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse, and all things change them to the contrary.", "sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him; and go, sir paris. every one prepare to follow this fair corse unto her grave. the heavens do lour upon you for some ill. move them no more by crossing their high will.", "faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone."], ["honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up, for, well you know, this is a pitiful case.", "ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.", "musicians, o musicians, \"heart's ease,\" \"heart's ease.\" o, an you will have me live, play \"heart's ease.\"", "why \"heart's ease?\"", "o musicians, because my heart itself plays \"my heart is full.\" o, play me some merry dump to comfort me.", "not a dump, we. 'tis no time to play now.", "you will not then?", "no.", "i will then give it you soundly.", "what will you give us?", "no money, on my faith, but the gleek. i will give you the minstrel.", "then i will give you the serving creature."], ["then will i lay the serving creature's dagger on your pate. i will carry no crotchets. i'll you, i'll you. do you note me?", "an you us and us, you note us.", "pray you, put up your dagger and put out your wit.", "then have at you with my wit. i will dry-beat you with an iron wit and put up my iron dagger. answer me like men.", "", "why \"silver sound\"? why \"music with her silver sound\"? what say you, simon catling?", "marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.", "prates. what say you, hugh rebeck?", "i say, \"silver sound\" because musicians sound for silver.", "prates too. what say you, james soundpost?", "faith, i know not what to say."], ["oh, i cry you mercy, you are the singer. i will say for you. it is \"music with her silver sound\" because musicians have no gold for sounding.", "", "what a pestilent knave is this same!", "hang him, jack! come, we'll in here, tarry for the mourners and stay dinner."], ["if i may trust the flattering truth of sleep, my dreams presage some joyful news at hand. my bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne, and all this day an unaccustomed spirit lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. i dreamt my lady came and found me dead strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think and breathed such life with kisses in my lips that i revived and was an emperor. ah me! how sweet is love itself possessed when but love's shadows are so rich in joy!", "news from verona! how now, balthasar? dost thou not bring me letters from the friar? how doth my lady? is my father well? how fares my juliet? that i ask again, for nothing can be ill if she be well.", "then she is well, and nothing can be ill. her body sleeps in capels' monument, and her immortal part with angels lives. i saw her laid low in her kindred's vault and presently took post to tell it you. o, pardon me for bringing these ill news, since you did leave it for my office, sir."], ["is it e'en so? then i defy you, stars! thou know'st my lodging. get me ink and paper, and hire post horses. i will hence tonight.", "i do beseech you, sir, have patience. your looks are pale and wild, and do import some misadventure.", "tush, thou art deceived. leave me and do the thing i bid thee do. hast thou no letters to me from the friar?", "no, my good lord.", "no matter. get thee gone, and hire those horses. i'll be with thee straight.", "well, juliet, i will lie with thee tonight. let's see for means. o mischief, thou art swift to enter in the thoughts of desperate men! i do remember an apothecary and hereabouts he dwells which late i noted in tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows, culling of simples. meager were his looks, sharp misery had worn him to the bones, and in his needy shop a tortoise hung, an alligator stuffed, and other skins of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves a beggarly account of empty boxes, green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds, remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses, were thinly scattered to make up a show."], ["noting this penury, to myself i said, \"an if a man did need a poison now\" whose sale is present death in mantua \"here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.\" oh, this same thought did but forerun my need, and this same needy man must sell it me. as i remember, this should be the house. being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. what, ho! apothecary!", "who calls so loud?", "come hither, man. i see that thou art poor. hold, there is forty ducats. let me have a dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear as will disperse itself through all the veins that the life-weary taker may fall dead, and that the trunk may be discharged of breath as violently as hasty powder fired doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.", "such mortal drugs i have, but mantua's law is death to any he that utters them.", "art thou so bare and full of wretchedness, and fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks. need and oppression starveth in thine eyes. contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back. the world is not thy friend nor the world's law. the world affords no law to make thee rich. then be not poor, but break it, and take this."], ["my poverty, but not my will, consents.", "i pay thy poverty and not thy will.", "romeo put this in any liquid thing you will and drink it off; and, if you had the strength of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.", "apothecary there is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls, doing more murder in this loathsome world, than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell. i sell thee poison. thou hast sold me none. farewell. buy food, and get thyself in flesh. come, cordial and not poison, go with me to juliet's grave, for there must i use thee."], ["holy franciscan friar! brother, ho!", "this same should be the voice of friar john. welcome from mantua. what says romeo? or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.", "going to find a barefoot brother out, one of our order, to associate me, here in this city visiting the sick, and finding him, the searchers of the town, suspecting that we both were in a house where the infectious pestilence did reign, sealed up the doors and would not let us forth. so that my speed to mantua there was stayed.", "who bare my letter, then, to romeo?", "i could not send it here it is again friar lawrence nor get a messenger to bring it thee, so fearful were they of infection.", "unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood, the letter was not nice but full of charge, of dear import, and the neglecting it may do much danger. friar john, go hence. get me an iron crow and bring it straight unto my cell."], ["brother, i'll go and bring it thee.", "now must i to the monument alone. within this three hours will fair juliet wake. she will beshrew me much that romeo hath had no notice of these accidents. but i will write again to mantua, and keep her at my cell till romeo come. poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!"], ["give me thy torch, boy. hence, and stand aloof. yet put it out, for i would not be seen. under yon yew trees lay thee all along, holding thine ear close to the hollow ground so shall no foot upon the churchyard tread, being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves, but thou shalt hear it. whistle then to me, as signal that thou hear'st something approach. give me those flowers. do as i bid thee, go.", "( ) i am almost afraid to stand alone here in the churchyard. yet i will adventure.", "juliet's sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed i strew o woe! thy canopy is dust and stones which with sweet water nightly i will dew. or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans, the obsequies that i for thee will keep nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.", "the boy gives warning something doth approach. what cursd foot wanders this way tonight to cross my obsequies and true love's rite? what with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile."], ["give me that mattock and the wrenching iron. balthasar hold, take this letter. early in the morning see thou deliver it to my lord and father. balthasar give me the light. balthasar upon thy life i charge thee, whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof, and do not interrupt me in my course. why i descend into this bed of death is partly to behold my lady's face, but chiefly to take thence from her dead finger a precious ring, a ring that i must use in dear employment. therefore hence, be gone. but if thou, jealous, dost return to pry in what i farther shall intend to do, by heaven, i will tear thee joint by joint and strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs. the time and my intents are savage, wild, more fierce and more inexorable far than empty tigers or the roaring sea.", "i will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.", "so shalt thou show me friendship. take thou that. balthasar live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow."], ["for all this same, i'll hide me hereabout. his looks i fear, and his intents i doubt.", "thou detestable maw, thou womb of death, gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth, thus i enforce thy rotten jaws to open, and in despite i'll cram thee with more food!", "this is that banished haughty montague, that murdered my love's cousin, with which grief, it is supposed the fair creature died. and here is come to do some villainous shame to the dead bodies. i will apprehend him. romeo stop thy unhallowed toil, vile montague! can vengeance be pursued further than death? condemnd villain, i do apprehend thee. obey and go with me, for thou must die.", null, "i must indeed, and therefore came i hither. good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man. fly hence and leave me. think upon these gone. let them affright thee. i beseech thee, youth, put not another sin upon my head by urging me to fury. o, be gone! by heaven, i love thee better than myself, for i come hither armed against myself. stay not, be gone. live, and hereafter say a madman's mercy bid thee run away."], ["i do defy thy commination and apprehend thee for a felon here.", "wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!", "o lord, they fight! i will go call the watch.", "oh, i am slain! if thou be merciful, open the tomb. lay me with juliet.", "in faith, i will. let me peruse this face. mercutio's kinsman, noble county paris. what said my man, when my betossd soul did not attend him as we rode? i think he told me paris should have married juliet. said he not so? or did i dream it so? or am i mad, hearing him talk of juliet, to think it was so? o, give me thy hand, one writ with me in sour misfortune's book. i'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.", "a grave? oh, no. a lantern, slaughtered youth, for here lies juliet, and her beauty makes this vault a feasting presence full of light. death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred. paris"], ["how oft when men are at the point of death have they been merry, which their keepers call a lightning before death! oh, how may i call this a lightning? o my love, my wife! death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath, hath had no power yet upon thy beauty. thou art not conquered. beauty's ensign yet is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks, and death's pale flag is not advancd there. tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet? o, what more favor can i do to thee, than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain to sunder his that was thine enemy? forgive me, cousin. ah, dear juliet, why art thou yet so fair? shall i believe that unsubstantial death is amorous, and that the lean abhorrd monster keeps thee here in dark to be his paramour? for fear of that, i still will stay with thee, and never from this palace of dim night depart again. here, here will i remain with worms that are thy chamber maids. oh, here will i set up my everlasting rest, and shake the yoke of inauspicious stars from this world-wearied flesh. eyes, look your last. arms, take your last embrace. and, lips, o you the doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss a dateless bargain to engrossing death. juliet, come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide. thou desperate pilot, now at once run on the dashing rocks thy seasick, weary bark. here's to my love! o true apothecary, thy drugs are quick. thus with a kiss i die."], ["saint francis be my speed! how oft tonight have my old feet stumbled at graves! who's there?", "here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.", "bliss be upon you! tell me, good my friend, what torch is yond that vainly lends his light to grubs and eyeless skulls? as i discern, it burneth in the capels' monument.", "it doth so, holy sir, and there's my master, one that you love.", "who is it?", "romeo.", "how long hath he been there?", "full half an hour.", "go with me to the vault.", "i dare not, sir. my master knows not but i am gone hence, and fearfully did menace me with death if i did stay to look on his intents.", "stay, then. i'll go alone. fear comes upon me. oh, much i fear some ill unthrifty thing."], ["as i did sleep under this yew tree here, i dreamt my master and another fought, and that my master slew him.", "romeo! alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains the stony entrance of the sepulcher? what mean these masterless and gory swords to lie discolored by this place of peace? romeo! o, pale! who else? what, paris too? and steeped in blood? ah, what an unkind hour is guilty of this lamentable chance! the lady stirs.", "o comfortable friar! where is my lord? i do remember well where i should be, and there i am. where is my romeo?", "i hear some noise. lady, come from that nest of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep. a greater power than we can contradict hath thwarted our intents. come, come away. thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead, and paris too. come, i'll dispose of thee among a sisterhood of holy nuns. stay not to question, for the watch is coming. come, go, good juliet. i dare no longer stay."], ["go, get thee hence, for i will not away.", "what's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand? poison, i see, hath been his timeless end. o churl, drunk all, and left no friendly drop to help me after? i will kiss thy lips. haply some poison yet doth hang on them, to make me die with a restorative. romeo thy lips are warm.", "page lead, boy. which way?", "yea, noise? then i'll be brief. o happy dagger, this is thy sheath. there rust and let me die. romeo", "this is the place. there, where the torch doth burn.", "the ground is bloody. search about the churchyard. go, some of you. whoe'er you find, attach.", "pitiful sight! here lies the county slain, and juliet bleeding, warm and newly dead, who here hath lain these two days buried. go, tell the prince. run to the capulets. raise up the montagues. some others search."], ["we see the ground whereon these woes do lie, but the true ground of all these piteous woes we cannot without circumstance descry.", "here's romeo's man. we found him in the churchyard.", "hold him in safety till the prince come hither.", "here is a friar that trembles, sighs and weeps. we took this mattock and this spade from him as he was coming from this churchyard's side.", "a great suspicion. stay the friar too.", "what misadventure is so early up that calls our person from our morning rest?", "what should it be that is so shrieked abroad?", "oh, the people in the street cry \"romeo,\" some \"juliet,\" and some \"paris,\" and all run with open outcry toward our monument."], ["what fear is this which startles in our ears?", "sovereign, here lies the county paris slain, and romeo dead, and juliet, dead before, warm and new killed.", "search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.", "here is a friar, and slaughtered romeo's man, with instruments upon them fit to open these dead men's tombs.", "o heavens! o wife, look how our daughter bleeds! this dagger hath mista'en for, lo, his house is empty on the back of montague, and it mis-sheathd in my daughter's bosom.", "o me! this sight of death is as a bell, that warns my old age to a sepulcher.", "come, montague, for thou art early up to see thy son and heir now early down.", "alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight. grief of my son's exile hath stopped her breath. what further woe conspires against mine age?", "look, and thou shalt see.", "romeo o thou untaught! what manners is in this, to press before thy father to a grave?"], ["seal up the mouth of outrage for a while, till we can clear these ambiguities and know their spring, their head, their true descent, and then will i be general of your woes, and lead you even to death. meantime forbear, and let mischance be slave to patience. bring forth the parties of suspicion.", "i am the greatest, able to do least, yet most suspected, as the time and place doth make against me, of this direful murder. and here i stand, both to impeach and purge, myself condemnd and myself excused.", "then say at once what thou dost know in this.", "i will be brief, for my short date of breath is not so long as is a tedious tale. romeo, there dead, was husband to that juliet, and she, there dead, that romeo's faithful wife. i married them, and their stol'n marriage day was tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death banished the new-made bridegroom from the city for whom, and not for tybalt, juliet pined. you, to remove that siege of grief from her, betrothed and would have married her perforce to county paris. then comes she to me, and with wild looks bid me devise some mean to rid her from this second marriage, or in my cell there would she kill herself. then gave i her, so tutored by my art, a sleeping potion, which so took effect as i intended, for it wrought on her the form of death."], ["meantime i writ to romeo, that he should hither come as this dire night, to help to take her from her borrowed grave, being the time the potion's force should cease. but he which bore my letter, friar john, was stayed by accident, and yesternight returned my letter back. then all alone at the prefixd hour of her waking came i to take her from her kindred's vault, meaning to keep her closely at my cell till i conveniently could send to romeo, but when i came, some minute ere the time of her awakening, here untimely lay the noble paris and true romeo dead. she wakes, and i entreated her come forth, and bear this work of heaven with patience. but then a noise did scare me from the tomb, and she, too desperate, would not go with me, but, as it seems, did violence on herself. all this i know, and to the marriage her nurse is privy. and if aught in this miscarried by my fault, let my old life be sacrificed some hour before his time unto the rigor of severest law.", "we still have known thee for a holy man. where's romeo's man? what can he say in this?", "i brought my master news of juliet's death, and then in post he came from mantua to this same place, to this same monument. this letter he early bid me give his father, and threatened me with death, going in the vault, if i departed not and left him there."], ["give me the letter. i will look on it. balthasar where is the county's page, that raised the watch? sirrah, what made your master in this place?", "he came with flowers to strew his lady's grave, and bid me stand aloof, and so i did. anon comes one with light to ope the tomb, and by and by my master drew on him, and then i ran away to call the watch.", "this letter doth make good the friar's words, their course of love, the tidings of her death. and here he writes that he did buy a poison of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal came to this vault to die and lie with juliet. where be these enemies? capulet! montague! see what a scourge is laid upon your hate, that heaven finds means to kill your joys with love! and i, for winking at your discords, too have lost a brace of kinsmen. all are punished.", "o brother montague, give me thy hand. this is my daughter's jointure, for no more can i demand.", "but i can give thee more, for i will raise her statue in pure gold, that whiles verona by that name is known, there shall no figure at such rate be set as that of true and faithful juliet.", "as rich shall romeo's by his lady's lie, poor sacrifices of our enmity."], ["a glooming peace this morning with it brings. the sun, for sorrow, will not show his head. go hence, to have more talk of these sad things. some shall be pardoned, and some punishd. for never was a story of more woe than this of juliet and her romeo."]], [["i'll pheeze you, in faith.", "a pair of stocks, you rogue!", "y'are a baggage, the slys are no rogues. look in the chronicles we came in with richard conqueror. therefore : let the world slide. sessa!", "you will not pay for the glasses you have burst?", "no, not a denier. go by, saint jeronimy. go to thy cold bed and warm thee.", "i know my remedy. i must go fetch the thirdborough.", "third, or fourth, or fifth borough, i'll answer him by law. i'll not budge an inch, boy. let him come, and kindly."], ["huntsman, i charge thee, tender well my hounds. breathe merriman, the poor cur is embossed, and couple clowder with the deep-mouthed brach. saw'st thou not, boy, how silver made it good at the hedge corner, in the coldest fault? i would not lose the dog for twenty pound.", "why, belman is as good as he, my lord. he cried upon it at the merest loss, and twice today picked out the dullest scent. trust me, i take him for the better dog.", "thou art a fool. if echo were as fleet, i would esteem him worth a dozen such. but sup them well and look unto them all. tomorrow i intend to hunt again.", "i will, my lord.", "what's here? one dead, or drunk? see, doth he breathe?", "he breathes, my lord. were he not warmed with ale, this were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.", "o monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies! grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image! sirs, i will practice on this drunken man. what think you: if he were conveyed to bed, wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers, a most delicious banquet by his bed, and brave attendants near him when he wakes, would not the beggar then forget himself?"], ["believe me, lord, i think he cannot choose.", "it would seem strange unto him when he waked.", "even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy. then take him up and manage well the jest. carry him gently to my fairest chamber and hang it round with all my wanton pictures. balm his foul head in warm distilled waters and burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet. procure me music ready when he wakes, to make a dulcet and a heavenly sound. and if he chance to speak, be ready straight and with a low submissive reverence say, \"what is it your honor will command?\" let one attend him with a silver basin full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers, another bear the ewer, the third a diaper, and say, \"will 't please your lordship cool your hands?\" someone be ready with a costly suit and ask him what apparel he will wear. another tell him of his hounds and horse, and that his lady mourns at his disease. persuade him that he hath been lunatic, and when he says he is, say that he dreams, for he is nothing but a mighty lord. this do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs. it will be pastime passing excellent if it be husbanded with modesty.", "my lord, i warrant you we will play our part as he shall think by our true diligence he is no less than what we say he is."], ["take him up gently, and to bed with him, and each one to his office when he wakes.", "sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds.", "belike some noble gentleman that means, traveling some journey, to repose him here.", "how now! who is it?", "an't please your honor, players that offer service to your lordship.", "bid them come near.", "now, fellows, you are welcome.", "we thank your honor.", "do you intend to stay with me tonight?", "so please your lordship to accept our duty.", "with all my heart. this fellow i remember since once he played a farmer's eldest son. 'twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well. i have forgot your name, but sure that part was aptly fitted and naturally performed."], ["i think 'twas soto that your honor means.", "'tis very true. thou didst it excellent. well, you are come to me in happy time, the rather for i have some sport in hand wherein your cunning can assist me much. there is a lord will hear you play tonight; but i am doubtful of your modesties, lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior for yet his honor never heard a play you break into some merry passion and so offend him. for i tell you, sirs, if you should smile, he grows impatient.", "fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselves were he the veriest antic in the world.", "go, sirrah, take them to the buttery and give them friendly welcome every one. let them want nothing that my house affords.", "sirrah, go you to barthol'mew, my page, and see him dressed in all suits like a lady. that done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber and call him \"madam,\" do him obeisance. tell him from me, as he will win my love, he bear himself with honorable action, such as he hath observed in noble ladies unto their lords, by them accomplishd."], ["such duty to the drunkard let him do with soft low tongue and lowly courtesy, and say, \"what is 't your honor will command, wherein your lady and your humble wife may show her duty and make known her love?\" and then with kind embracements, tempting kisses, and with declining head into his bosom, bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed to see her noble lord restored to health, who for this seven years hath esteemed him no better than a poor and loathsome beggar. and if the boy have not a woman's gift to rain a shower of commanded tears, an onion will do well for such a shift, which in a napkin being close conveyed shall in despite enforce a watery eye. see this dispatched with all the haste thou canst: anon i'll give thee more instructions.", "i know the boy will well usurp the grace, voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman. i long to hear him call the drunkard \"husband,\" and how my men will stay themselves from laughter when they do homage to this simple peasant. i'll in to counsel them. haply my presence may well abate the over-merry spleen which otherwise would grow into extremes."], ["for god's sake, a pot of small ale.", "will 't please your lordship drink a cup of sack?", "will 't please your honor taste of these conserves?", "what raiment will your honor wear today?", "i am christophero sly. call not me \"honor\" nor \"lordship.\" i ne'er drank sack in my life. an if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef. ne'er ask me what raiment i'll wear, for i have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor no more shoes than feet, nay sometime more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over-leather.", "heaven cease this idle humor in your honor! oh, that a mighty man of such descent, of such possessions and so high esteem, should be infusd with so foul a spirit!"], ["what, would you make me mad? am not i christopher sly, old sly's son of burton heath, by birth a peddler, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a bearherd, and now by present profession a tinker? ask marian hacket, the fat alewife of wincot, if she know me not! if she say i am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lying'st knave in christendom. what! i am not bestraught! here's", "oh, this it is that makes your lady mourn!", "oh, this is it that makes your servants droop!", "hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house, as beaten hence by your strange lunacy. o noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth, call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment, and banish hence these abject lowly dreams. look how thy servants do attend on thee, each in his office ready at thy beck. wilt thou have music? hark! apollo plays,", "and twenty cagd nightingales do sing: or wilt thou sleep? we'll have thee to a couch softer and sweeter than the lustful bed on purpose trimmed up for semiramis. say thou wilt walk, we will bestrew the ground. or wilt thou ride? thy horses shall be trapped, their harness studded all with gold and pearl. dost thou love hawking? thou hast hawks will soar above the morning lark. or wilt thou hunt? thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them and fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth."], ["say thou wilt course. thy greyhounds are as swift as breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.", "dost thou love pictures? we will fetch thee straight adonis painted by a running brook and cytherea all in sedges hid, which seem to move and wanton with her breath, even as the waving sedges play with wind.", "we'll show thee io as she was a maid and how she was beguiled and surprised, as lively painted as the deed was done.", "or daphne roaming through a thorny wood, scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds, and at that sight shall sad apollo weep, so workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.", "thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord. thou hast a lady far more beautiful than any woman in this waning age.", "and till the tears that she hath shed for thee like envious floods o'errun her lovely face, she was the fairest creature in the world and yet she is inferior to none."], ["am i a lord, and have i such a lady? or do i dream? or have i dreamed till now? i do not sleep: i see, i hear, i speak. i smell sweet savors and i feel soft things. upon my life, i am a lord indeed and not a tinker, nor christopher sly. well, bring our lady hither to our sight, and once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.", "will 't please your mightiness to wash your hands? o, how we joy to see your wit restored! o, that once more you knew but what you are! these fifteen years you have been in a dream or, when you waked, so waked as if you slept.", "these fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap. but did i never speak of all that time?", "o, yes, my lord, but very idle words. for though you lay here in this goodly chamber, yet would you say ye were beaten out of door; and rail upon the hostess of the house, and say you would present her at the leet, because she brought stone jugs and no sealed quarts. sometimes you would call out for cicely hacket.", "ay, the woman's maid of the house.", "why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid, nor no such men as you have reckoned up, as stephen sly and old john naps of greece, and peter turph and henry pimpernell, and twenty more such names and men as these, which never were, nor no man ever saw."], ["now lord be thanked for my good amends!", "amen.", "i thank thee. thou shalt not lose by it.", "how fares my noble lord?", "marry, i fare well, for here is cheer enough. where is my wife?", "here, noble lord. what is thy will with her?", "are you my wife and will not call me \"husband\"? my men should call me \"lord.\" i am your goodman.", "my husband and my lord, my lord and husband, i am your wife in all obedience.", "i know it well. what must i call her?", "\"madam.\"", "\"alice madam,\" or \"joan madam\"?", "\"madam,\" and nothing else. so lords call ladies."], ["madam wife, they say that i have dreamed and slept above some fifteen year or more.", "ay, and the time seems thirty unto me, being all this time abandoned from your bed.", "'tis much. servants, leave me and her alone. madam, undress you and come now to bed.", "thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you to pardon me yet for a night or two, or if not so, until the sun be set. for your physicians have expressly charged, in peril to incur your former malady, that i should yet absent me from your bed. i hope this reason stands for my excuse.", "ay, it stands so that i may hardly tarry so long. but i would be loath to fall into my dreams again. i will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.", "your honor's players, hearing your amendment, are come to play a pleasant comedy, for so your doctors hold it very meet, seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood, and melancholy is the nurse of frenzy. therefore they thought it good you hear a play and frame your mind to mirth and merriment, which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life."], ["marry, i will. let them play it. is not a comonty a christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?", "no, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.", "what, household stuff?", "it is a kind of history.", "well, we'll see 't. come, madam wife, sit by my side and let the world slip. we shall ne'er be younger."], ["tranio, since for the great desire i had to see fair padua, nursery of arts, i am arrived for fruitful lombardy, the pleasant garden of great italy, and by my father's love and leave am armed with his goodwill and thy good company. my trusty servant, well approved in all, here let us breathe and haply institute a course of learning and ingenious studies. pisa, renownd for grave citizens, gave me my being and my father first, a merchant of great traffic through the world, vincentio, come of the bentivolii. vincentio's son, brought up in florence, it shall become to serve all hopes conceived to deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds. and therefore, tranio, for the time i study virtue, and that part of philosophy will i apply that treats of happiness by virtue specially to be achieved. tell me thy mind, for i have pisa left and am to padua come, as he that leaves a shallow plash to plunge him in the deep and with satiety seeks to quench his thirst."], ["gentle master mine. i am in all affected as yourself, glad that you thus continue your resolve to suck the sweets of sweet philosophy. only, good master, while we do admire this virtue and this moral discipline, let's be no stoics nor no stocks, i pray, or so devote to aristotle's checks as ovid be an outcast quite abjured. balk logic with acquaintance that you have, and practice rhetoric in your common talk; music and poesy use to quicken you; the mathematics and the metaphysics fall to them as you find your stomach serves you. no profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en. in brief, sir, study what you most affect.", "gramercies, tranio, well dost thou advise. if, biondello, thou wert come ashore, we could at once put us in readiness and take a lodging fit to entertain such friends as time in padua shall beget. but stay awhile. what company is this?", "master, some show to welcome us to town.", "gentlemen, importune me no farther, for how i firmly am resolved you know that is, not to bestow my youngest daughter before i have a husband for the elder. if either of you both love katherina, because i know you well and love you well leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure."], ["to cart her, rather. she's too rough for me. there, there, hortensio, will you any wife?", "baptista i pray you, sir, is it your will to make a stale of me amongst these mates?", "\"mates,\" maid? how mean you that? no mates for you unless you were of gentler, milder mold.", "i' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear. i wis it is not halfway to her heart. but if it were, doubt not her care should be to comb your noddle with a three-legged stool and paint your face and use you like a fool.", "from all such devils, good lord, deliver us!", "and me too, good lord!", "lucentio husht, master, here's some good pastime toward. that wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.", "tranio but in the other's silence do i see maid's mild behavior and sobriety. peace, tranio."], ["lucentio well said, master. mum, and gaze your fill.", "gremio hortensio gentlemen, that i may soon make good what i have said bianca, get you in, and let it not displease thee, good bianca, for i will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.", "a pretty peat! it is best put finger in the eye, an she knew why.", "sister, content you in my discontent. sir, to your pleasure humbly i subscribe. my books and instruments shall be my company, on them to look and practice by myself.", "hark, tranio! thou may'st hear minerva speak.", "signior baptista, will you be so strange? sorry am i that our goodwill effects bianca's grief.", "why will you mew her up, signior baptista, for this fiend of hell and make her bear the penance of her tongue?", "gentlemen, content ye. i am resolved. go in, bianca."], ["and for i know she taketh most delight in music, instruments, and poetry, schoolmasters will i keep within my house, fit to instruct her youth. if you, hortensio, or, signior gremio, you know any such, prefer them hither, for to cunning men i will be very kind, and liberal to mine own children in good bringing up. and so farewell. katherina, you may stay, for i have more to commune with bianca.", "why, and i trust i may go too, may i not? what, shall i be appointed hours as though, belike, i knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?", "you may go to the devil's dam! your gifts are so good here's none will hold you. their love is not so great, hortensio, but we may blow our nails together and fast it fairly out. our cake's dough on both sides. farewell. yet for the love i bear my sweet bianca, if i can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, i will wish him to her father.", "so will i, signior gremio. but a word, i pray. though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle, know now upon advice, it toucheth us both, that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress and be happy rivals in bianca's love, to labor and effect one thing specially."], ["what's that, i pray?", "marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.", "a husband? a devil!", "i say a husband.", "i say a devil. think'st thou, hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?", "tush, gremio. though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellows in the world, an a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.", "i cannot tell. but i had as lief take her dowry with this condition: to be whipped at the high cross every morning.", "faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten apples. but come, since this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained till by helping baptista's eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband, and then have to 't afresh. sweet bianca! happy man be his dole! he that runs fastest gets the ring. how say you, signior gremio?", "i am agreed, and would i had given him the best horse inv padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the house of her! come on."], ["i pray, sir, tell me, is it possible that love should of a sudden take such hold?", "o tranio, till i found it to be true, i never thought it possible or likely. but see, while idly i stood looking on, i found the effect of love in idleness and now in plainness do confess to thee that art to me as secret and as dear as anna to the queen of carthage was, tranio, i burn, i pine, i perish, tranio, if i achieve not this young modest girl. counsel me, tranio, for i know thou canst. assist me, tranio, for i know thou wilt.", "master, it is no time to chide you now. affection is not rated from the heart. if love have touched you, naught remains but so:", "gramercies, lad, go forward. this contents. the rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.", "master, you looked so longly on the maid, perhaps you marked not what's the pith of all.", "oh yes, i saw sweet beauty in her face such as the daughter of agenor had, that made great jove to humble him to her hand when with his knees he kissed the cretan strand."], ["saw you no more? marked you not how her sister began to scold and raise up such a storm that mortal ears might hardly endure the din?", "tranio, i saw her coral lips to move and with her breath she did perfume the air. sacred and sweet was all i saw in her.", "nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his trance. i pray, awake, sir! if you love the maid, bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. thus it stands: her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd that till the father rid his hands of her, master, your love must live a maid at home, and therefore has he closely mewed her up, because she will not be annoyed with suitors.", "ah, tranio, what a cruel father's he! but art thou not advised, he took some care to get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?", "ay, marry, am i, sir; and now 'tis plotted!", "i have it, tranio!", "master, for my hand, both our inventions meet and jump in one.", "tell me thine first.", "you will be schoolmaster and undertake the teaching of the maid: that's your device.", "it is. may it be done?"], ["not possible. for who shall bear your part and be in padua here vincentio's son, keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends, visit his countrymen and banquet them?", "content thee, for i have it full. we have not yet been seen in any house, nor can we be distinguished by our faces for man or master. then it follows thus: thou shalt be master, tranio, in my stead, keep house and port and servants as i should. i will some other be, some florentine, some neapolitan, or meaner man of pisa. 'tis hatched, and shall be so. tranio, at once uncase thee. take my colored hat and cloak.", "when biondello comes, he waits on thee, but i will charm him first to keep his tongue.", "where have i been? nay, how now, where are you? master, has my fellow tranio stolen your clothes? or you stolen his? or both? pray, what's the news?", "sirrah, come hither: 'tis no time to jest, and therefore frame your manners to the time. your fellow tranio here, to save my life, puts my apparel and my countenance on, and i for my escape have put on his; for in a quarrel since i came ashore i killed a man and fear i was descried. wait you on him, i charge you, as becomes, while i make way from hence to save my life. you understand me?", "aye, sir. ne'er a whit.", "and not a jot of \"tranio\" in your mouth. tranio is changed into lucentio.", "the better for him. would i were so too.", "so could i, faith, boy, to have the next wish after, that lucentio indeed had baptista's youngest daughter. but, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, i advise you use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies. when i am alone, why then i am tranio; but in all places else, your master lucentio."]], [["boatswain!", "here, master. what cheer?", "good, speak to th' mariners. fall to 't yarely, or we run ourselves aground. bestir, bestir.", "heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! yare! yare! take in the topsail. tend to th' master's whistle. blow, till thou burst thy wind, if room enough!", "good boatswain, have care. where's the master? play the men.", "i pray now, keep below.", "where is the master, boatswain?"], ["do you not hear him? you mar our labor. keep your cabins. you do assist the storm.", "nay, good, be patient.", "when the sea is. hence! what cares these roarers for the name of king? to cabin, silence! trouble us not.", "good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.", "none that i more love than myself. you are a councilor. if you can command these elements to silence and work the peace of the present, we will not hand a rope more. use your authority. if you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap. cheerly, good hearts! out of our way, i say.", "i have great comfort from this fellow. methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him. his complexion is perfect gallows. stand fast, good fate, to his hanging. make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage. if he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable."], ["down with the topmast! yare, lower, lower! bring her to try wi' th' main course.", "a plague upon this howling! they are louder than the weather or our office.", "yet again? what do you here? shall we give o'er and drown? have you a mind to sink?", "a pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!", "work you, then.", "hang, cur! hang, you whoreson insolent noisemaker! we are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.", "i'll warrant him for drowning though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an unstanched wench.", "lay her a-hold, a-hold! set her two courses off to sea again. lay her off!", "all lost! to prayers, to prayers, all lost!"], ["what, must our mouths be cold?", "the king and prince at prayers. let's assist them, for our case is as theirs.", "i'm out of patience.", "we are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards. this wide-chopped rascal would thou mightst lie drowning the washing of ten tides!", "he'll be hanged yet, though every drop of water swear against it and gape at widest to glut him.", "mercy on us! we split, we split! farewell, my wife and children! farewell, brother! we split, we split, we split!", "let's all sink wi' th' king.", "let's take leave of him."], ["now would i give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground: long heath, brown furze, anything. the wills above be done, but i would fain die a dry death."], ["if by your art, my dearest father, you have put the wild waters in this roar, allay them. the sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch, but that the sea, mounting to th' welkin's cheek, dashes the fire out. oh, i have suffered with those that i saw suffer. a brave vessel who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her dashed all to pieces. oh, the cry did knock against my very heart! poor souls, they perished. had i been any god of power, i would have sunk the sea within the earth or ere it should the good ship so have swallowed and the fraughting souls within her.", "be collected. no more amazement. tell your piteous heart there's no harm done.", "oh, woe the day!", "no harm. i have done nothing but in care of thee, of thee, my dear one thee my daughter, who art ignorant of what thou art, naught knowing of whence i am, nor that i am more better than prospero, master of a full poor cell and thy no greater father.", "more to know did never meddle with my thoughts."], ["'tis time i should inform thee farther. lend thy hand and pluck my magic garment from me.", "so, lie there, my art. wipe thou thine eyes. have comfort. the direful spectacle of the wrack, which touched the very virtue of compassion in thee, i have with such provision in mine art so safely ordered that there is no soul no, not so much perdition as an hair betid to any creature in the vessel which thou heard'st cry, which thou sawst sink. sit down. for thou must now know farther.", "you have often begun to tell me what i am, but stopped and left me to a bootless inquisition, concluding, \"stay. not yet.\"", "the hour's now come. the very minute bids thee ope thine ear. obey and be attentive. canst thou remember a time before we came unto this cell? i do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not out three years old.", "certainly, sir, i can.", "by what? by any other house or person? of anything the image tell me that hath kept with thy remembrance."], ["'tis far off, and rather like a dream than an assurance that my remembrance warrants. had i not four or five women once that tended me?", "thou hadst, and more, miranda. but how is it that this lives in thy mind? what seest thou else in the dark backward and abysm of time? if thou rememberest aught ere thou camest here, how thou camest here thou mayst.", "but that i do not.", "twelve year since, miranda, twelve year since, thy father was the duke of milan and a prince of power.", "sir, are not you my father?", "thy mother was a piece of virtue and she said thou wast my daughter. and thy father was duke of milan, and thou his only heir and princess no worse issued.", "oh, the heavens! what foul play had we that we came from thence? or bless was 't we did?", "both, both, my girl. by foul play, as thou sayst, were we heaved thence, but blessedly holp hither."], ["oh, my heart bleeds to think o' th' teen that i have turned you to, which is from my remembrance! please you, farther.", "my brother and thy uncle, called antonio i pray thee, mark me (that a brother should be so perfidious!) he whom next thyself of all the world i loved and to him put the manage of my state, as at that time through all the signories it was the first, and prospero the prime duke, being so reputed in dignity, and for the liberal arts without a parallel. those being all my study, the government i cast upon my brother and to my state grew stranger, being transported and rapt in secret studies. thy false uncle dost thou attend me?", "sir, most heedfully.", "being once perfected how to grant suits, how to deny them, who t' advance and who to trash for overtopping, new created the creatures that were mine, i say or changed 'em, or else new formed 'em having both the key of officer and office, set all hearts i' th' state to what tune pleased his ear, that now he was the ivy which had hid my princely trunk, and sucked my verdure out on 't. thou attend'st not.", "o, good sir, i do."], ["i pray thee, mark me. i, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated to closeness and the bettering of my mind with that which, but by being so retired, o'erprized all popular rate, in my false brother awaked an evil nature. and my trust, like a good parent, did beget of him a falsehood in its contrary as great as my trust was, which had indeed no limit, a confidence sans bound. he being thus lorded, not only with what my revenue yielded but what my power might else exact, like one who having into truth, by telling of it, made such a sinner of his memory to credit his own lie he did believe he was indeed the duke, out o' th' substitution and executing th' outward face of royalty, with all prerogative. hence his ambition growing dost thou hear?", "your tale, sir, would cure deafness.", "to have no screen between this part he played and him he played it for, he needs will be absolute milan. me, poor man, my library was dukedom large enough. of temporal royalties he thinks me now incapable, confederates so dry he was for sway wi' th' king of naples to give him annual tribute, do him homage, subject his coronet to his crown and bend the dukedom yet unbowed alas, poor milan! to most ignoble stooping.", "oh, the heavens!"], ["mark his condition and the event. then tell me if this might be a brother.", "i should sin to think but nobly of my grandmother. good wombs have borne bad sons.", "now the condition. the king of naples, being an enemy to me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit, which was that he, in lieu o' th' premises of homage and i know not how much tribute, should presently extirpate me and mine out of the dukedom, and confer fair milan with all the honors on my brother. whereon, a treacherous army levied, one midnight fated to th' purpose did antonio open the gates of milan, and, i' th' dead of darkness, the ministers for th' purpose hurried thence me and thy crying self.", "alack, for pity! i, not remembering how i cried out then, will cry it o'er again. it is a hint that wrings mine eyes to 't.", "hear a little further and then i'll bring thee to the present business which now 's upon 's, without the which this story were most impertinent.", "wherefore did they not that hour destroy us?"], ["well demanded, wench. my tale provokes that question. dear, they durst not, so dear the love my people bore me, nor set a mark so bloody on the business, but with colors fairer painted their foul ends. in few, they hurried us aboard a bark, bore us some leagues to sea, where they prepared a rotten carcass of a butt, not rigged, nor tackle, sail, nor mast. the very rats instinctively had quit it. there they hoist us to cry to th' sea that roared to us, to sigh to th' winds whose pity, sighing back again, did us but loving wrong.", "alack, what trouble was i then to you!", "oh, a cherubim thou wast that did preserve me. thou didst smile infusd with a fortitude from heaven, when i have decked the sea with drops full salt, under my burthen groaned; which raised in me an undergoing stomach to bear up against what should ensue.", "how came we ashore?"], ["by providence divine. some food we had and some fresh water that a noble neapolitan, gonzalo, out of his charity, who being then appointed master of this design, did give us, with rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries, which since have steaded much. so, of his gentleness, knowing i loved my books, he furnished me from mine own library with volumes that i prize above my dukedom.", "would i might but ever see that man!", "now i arise. sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow. here in this island we arrived, and here have i, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit than other princesses can that have more time for vainer hours and tutors not so careful.", "heavens thank you for 't! and now, i pray you, sir for still 'tis beating in my mind your reason for raising this sea storm?", "know thus far forth: by accident most strange, bountiful fortune (now my dear lady) hath mine enemies brought to this shore. and by my prescience i find my zenith doth depend upon a most auspicious star, whose influence if now i court not but omit, my fortunes will ever after droop. here cease more questions."], ["thou art inclined to sleep. 'tis a good dullness, and give it way. i know thou canst not choose.", "come away, servant, come. i am ready now. approach, my ariel, come.", "all hail, great master! grave sir, hail! i come to answer thy best pleasure, be 't to fly, to swim, to dive into the fire, to ride on the curled clouds. to thy strong bidding, task ariel and all his quality.", "hast thou, spirit, performed to point the tempest that i bade thee?", "to every article. i boarded the king's ship. now on the beak, now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin, i flamed amazement. sometime i'd divide, and burn in many places. on the topmast, the yards, and bowsprit would i flame distinctly, then meet and join. jove's lightning, the precursors o' th' dreadful thunderclaps, more momentary and sight-outrunning were not. the fire and cracks of sulfurous roaring the most mighty neptune seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble, yea, his dread trident shake.", "my brave spirit! who was so firm, so constant, that this coil would not infect his reason?"], ["not a soul but felt a fever of the mad and played some tricks of desperation. all but mariners plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel, then all afire with me. the king's son, ferdinand, with hair up-staring then, like reeds, not hair was the first man that leaped, cried, \"hell is empty and all the devils are here.\"", "why, that's my spirit! but was not this nigh shore?", "close by, my master.", "but are they, ariel, safe?", "not a hair perished. on their sustaining garments not a blemish, but fresher than before. and, as thou badest me, in troops i have dispersed them 'bout the isle. the king's son have i landed by himself, whom i left cooling of the air with sighs in an odd angle of the isle, and sitting, his arms in this sad knot.", "of the king's ship, the mariners, say how thou hast disposed, and all the rest o' th' fleet.", "safely in harbor is the king's ship. in the deep nook where once thou called'st me up at midnight to fetch dew from the still-vexed bermoothes, there she's hid."], ["the mariners all under hatches stowed, who, with a charm joined to their suffered labor, i have left asleep. and for the rest o' th' fleet, which i dispersed, they all have met again and are upon the mediterranean float, bound sadly home for naples, supposing that they saw the king's ship wracked and his great person perish.", "ariel, thy charge exactly is performed. but there's more work. what is the time o' th' day?", "past the mid season.", "at least two glasses. the time 'twixt six and now must by us both be spent most preciously.", "is there more toil? since thou dost give me pains, let me remember thee what thou hast promised, which is not yet performed me.", "how now? moody? what is 't thou canst demand?", "my liberty.", "before the time be out? no more!", "i prithee, remember i have done thee worthy service, told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, served without or grudge or grumblings. thou didst promise to bate me a full year."], ["dost thou forget from what a torment i did free thee?", "no.", "thou dost, and think'st it much to tread the ooze of the salt deep, to run upon the sharp wind of the north, to do me business in the veins o' th' earth when it is baked with frost.", "i do not, sir.", "thou liest, malignant thing! hast thou forgot the foul witch sycorax, who with age and envy was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her?", "no, sir.", "thou hast. where was she born? speak. tell me.", "sir, in argier.", "oh, was she so? i must once in a month recount what thou hast been, which thou forget'st. this damned witch sycorax, for mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible to enter human hearing, from argier, thou know'st, was banished. for one thing she did they would not take her life. is not this true?", "ay, sir."], ["this blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child and here was left by th' sailors. thou, my slave, as thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant. and, for thou wast a spirit too delicate to act her earthy and abhorred commands, refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee, by help of her more potent ministers and in her most unmitigable rage, into a cloven pine, within which rift imprisoned thou didst painfully remain a dozen years; within which space she died and left thee there, where thou didst vent thy groans as fast as mill wheels strike. then was this island save for the son that she did litter here, a freckled whelp hag-born not honored with a human shape.", "yes, caliban, her son.", "dull thing, i say so. he, that caliban whom now i keep in service. thou best know'st what torment i did find thee in. thy groans of ever angry bears. it was a torment did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts to lay upon the damned, which sycorax could not again undo. it was mine art, when i arrived and heard thee, that made gape the pine and let thee out.", "i thank thee, master.", "if thou more murmur'st, i will rend an oak and peg thee in his knotty entrails till thou hast howled away twelve winters."], ["pardon, master. i will be correspondent to command and do my spiriting gently.", "do so, and after two days i will discharge thee.", "that's my noble master! what shall i do? say, what? what shall i do?", "go make thyself like a nymph o' th' sea. be subject to no sight but thine and mine, invisible to every eyeball else. go take this shape and hither come in 't. go hence with diligence.", "miranda awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well. awake!", "the strangeness of your story put heaviness in me.", "shake it off. come on. we'll visit caliban, my slave who never yields us kind answer.", "'tis a villain, sir, i do not love to look on."], ["but as 'tis, we cannot miss him. he does make our fire, fetch in our wood, and serves in offices that profit us. what, ho! slave! caliban! thou earth, thou! speak.", "there's wood enough within.", "come forth, i say! there's other business for thee. come, thou tortoise! when?", "fine apparition! my quaint ariel, hark in thine ear. ariel", "my lord it shall be done.", "caliban thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself upon thy wicked dam, come forth!", "as wicked dew as e'er my mother brushed with raven's feather from unwholesome fen drop on you both! a southwest blow on ye and blister you all o'er!"], ["for this, be sure, tonight thou shalt have cramps, side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up. urchins shall, forth at vast of night that they may work, all exercise on thee. thou shalt be pinched as thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging than bees that made 'em.", "i must eat my dinner. this island's mine, by sycorax my mother, which thou takest from me. when thou camest first, thou strok'st me and made much of me, wouldst give me water with berries in 't, and teach me how to name the bigger light, and how the less, that burn by day and night. and then i loved thee and showed thee all the qualities o' th' isle, the fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and fertile. cursed be i that did so! all the charms of sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you! for i am all the subjects that you have, which first was mine own king. and here you sty me in this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me the rest o' th' island.", "thou most lying slave, whom stripes may move, not kindness! i have used thee, filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee in mine own cell till thou didst seek to violate the honor of my child.", "oh ho, oh ho! would 't had been done! thou didst prevent me. i had peopled else this isle with calibans."], ["abhorrd slave, which any print of goodness wilt not take, being capable of all ill! i pitied thee, took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour one thing or other. when thou didst not, savage, know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like a thing most brutish, i endowed thy purposes with words that made them known. but thy vile race, though thou didst learn, had that in 't which good natures could not abide to be with. therefore wast thou deservedly confined into this rock, who hadst deserved more than a prison.", "you taught me language, and my profit on 't is i know how to curse. the red plague rid you for learning me your language!", "hag-seed, hence! fetch us in fuel. and be quick, thou 'rt best, to answer other business. shrug'st thou, malice? if thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly what i command, i'll rack thee with old cramps, fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar that beasts shall tremble at thy din.", "no, pray thee. i must obey. his art is of such power, it would control my dam's god, setebos, and make a vassal of him.", "so, slave, hence!"], [", . . ,", "bow-wow.", "the watchdogs bark.", "bow-wow.", "hark, hark! i hear the strain of strutting chanticleer cry \"cock-a-diddle-dow.\"", "where should this music be? i' th' air or th' earth? it sounds no more, and sure, it waits upon some god o' th' island. sitting on a bank, weeping again the king my father's wrack, this music crept by me upon the waters, allaying both their fury and my passion with its sweet air. thence i have followed it, or it hath drawn me rather. but 'tis gone. no, it begins again."], [". . . , .", "ding-dong.", "hark, now i hear them.", "ding-dong, bell.", "the ditty does remember my drowned father. this is no mortal business, nor no sound that the earth owes. i hear it now above me.", "miranda the fringd curtains of thine eye advance and say what thou seest yond.", "what is 't? a spirit? lord, how it looks about! believe me, sir, it carries a brave form. but 'tis a spirit.", "no, wench! it eats and sleeps and hath such senses as we have, such. this gallant which thou seest was in the wrack. and, but he's something stained with grief that's beauty's canker, thou mightst call him a goodly person. he hath lost his fellows and strays about to find 'em."], ["i might call him a thing divine, for nothing natural i ever saw so noble.", "it goes on, i see, as my soul prompts it. spirit, fine spirit! i'll free thee within two days for this.", "miranda most sure, the goddess on whom these airs attend! vouchsafe my prayer may know if you remain upon this island, and that you will some good instruction give how i may bear me here. my prime request, which i do last pronounce, is o you wonder! if you be maid or no.", "no wonder, sir, but certainly a maid.", "my language! heavens, i am the best of them that speak this speech, were i but where 'tis spoken.", "how? the best? what wert thou if the king of naples heard thee?", "a single thing, as i am now, that wonders to hear thee speak of naples. he does hear me, and that he does i weep. myself am naples, who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld the king my father wracked.", "alack, for mercy!"], ["yes, faith, and all his lords, the duke of milan and his brave son being twain.", "the duke of milan and his more braver daughter could control thee if now 'twere fit to do 't! at the first sight they have changed eyes. delicate ariel, i'll set thee free for this. ferdinand a word, good sir. i fear you have done yourself some wrong. a word.", "why speaks my father so ungently? this is the third man that e'er i saw, the first that e'er i sighed for. pity move my father to be inclined my way!", "miranda oh, if a virgin, and your affection not gone forth, i'll make you the queen of naples.", "soft, sir! one word more. they are both in either's powers, but this swift business i must uneasy make lest too light winning make the prize light. ferdinand one word more. i charge thee that thou attend me. thou dost here usurp the name thou owest not, and hast put thyself upon this island as a spy to win it from me, the lord on 't.", "no, as i am a man!"], ["there's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple. if the ill spirit have so fair a house, good things will strive to dwell with 't.", "ferdinand follow me. miranda speak not you for him. he's a traitor. ferdinand come, i'll manacle thy neck and feet together. seawater shalt thou drink. thy food shall be the fresh-brook mussles, withered roots, and husks wherein the acorn cradled. follow.", "no. i will resist such entertainment till mine enemy has more power.", "o dear father, make not too rash a trial of him, for he's gentle and not fearful.", "what, i say? my foot my tutor? put thy sword up, traitor, who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience is so possessed with guilt. come from thy ward, for i can here disarm thee with this stick and make thy weapon drop.", "beseech you, father.", "hence! hang not on my garments."], ["sir, have pity, i'll be his surety.", "silence! one word more shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. what, an advocate for an imposter? hush, thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he, having seen but him and caliban. foolish wench, to th' most of men this is a caliban and they to him are angels.", "my affections are then most humble. i have no ambition to see a goodlier man.", "ferdinand come on. obey. thy nerves are in their infancy again and have no vigor in them.", "so they are. my spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up. my father's loss, the weakness which i feel, the wrack of all my friends, nor this man's threats, to whom i am subdued, are but light to me, might i but through my prison once a day behold this maid. all corners else o' th' earth let liberty make use of. space enough have i in such a prison.", "it works! ferdinand come on. thou hast done well, fine ariel! ferdinand follow me. ariel hark what thou else shalt do me."], ["ferdinand be of comfort. my father's of a better nature, sir, than he appears by speech. this is unwonted which now came from him.", "ariel thou shalt be free as mountain winds. but then exactly do all points of my command.", "to th' syllable.", "ferdinand come, follow. miranda speak not for him."], ["alonso beseech you, sir, be merry. you have cause, so have we all, of joy, for our escape is much beyond our loss. our hint of woe is common. every day some sailor's wife, the masters of some merchant, and the merchant have just our theme of woe. but for the miracle i mean our preservation few in millions can speak like us. then wisely, good sir, weigh our sorrow with our comfort.", "prithee, peace.", "antonio he receives comfort like cold porridge.", "sebastian the visitor will not give him o'er so.", "look he's winding up the watch of his wit. by and by it will strike.", "alonso sir", "antonio one. tell.", "when every grief is entertained that's offered, comes to th' entertainer"], ["a dollar.", "dolor comes to him, indeed. you have spoken truer than you purposed.", "you have taken it wiselier than i meant you should.", "alonso therefore, my lord", "sebastian fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!", "gonzalo i prithee, spare.", "well, i have done. but yet", "antonio he will be talking.", "which, of he or adrian, for a good wager, first begins to crow?", "the old cock.", "the cockerel.", "done. the wager?", "a laughter.", "a match!", "though this island seem to be desert", "sebastian ha, ha, ha!"], ["so you're paid.", "uninhabitable and almost inaccessible", "yet", "yet", "he could not miss 't.", "it must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate temperance.", "temperance was a delicate wench.", "ay, and a subtle, as he most learnedly delivered.", "the air breathes upon us here most sweetly.", "as if it had lungs, and rotten ones.", "or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.", "here is everything advantageous to life.", "true. save means to live.", "of that there's none, or little.", "how lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!", "the ground indeed is tawny.", "with an eye of green in 't.", "he misses not much."], ["no, he doth but mistake the truth totally.", "but the rarity of it is which is indeed almost beyond credit", "as many vouched rarities are.", "that our garments, being, as they were, drenched in the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water.", "if but one of his pockets could speak, would it not say he lies?", "ay, or very falsely pocket up his report.", "methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in afric, at the marriage of the king's fair daughter claribel to the king of tunis.", "'twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.", "tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their queen.", "not since widow dido's time.", "widow! a pox o' that! how came that \"widow\" in? widow dido!"], ["what if he had said \"widower neas\" too? good lord, how you take it!", "\"widow dido\" said you? you make me study of that. she was of carthage, not of tunis.", "this tunis, sir, was carthage.", "carthage?", "i assure you, carthage.", "his word is more than the miraculous harp. he hath raised the wall and houses too.", "what impossible matter will he make easy next?", "i think he will carry this island home in his pocket and give it his son for an apple.", "and sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring forth more islands.", "ay.", "why, in good time.", "alonso sir, we were talking that our garments seem now as fresh as when we were at tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now queen."], ["and the rarest that e'er came there.", "bate, i beseech you, widow dido.", "oh, widow dido? ay, widow dido.", "is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day i wore it? i mean, in a sort.", "that \"sort\" was well fished for.", "when i wore it at your daughter's marriage?", "you cram these words into mine ears against the stomach of my sense. would i had never married my daughter there! for, coming thence, my son is lost and, in my rate, she too, who is so far from italy removed i ne'er again shall see her. o thou mine heir of naples and of milan, what strange fish hath made his meal on thee?", "sir, he may live. i saw him beat the surges under him, and ride upon their backs. he trod the water, whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted the surge most swoll'n that met him. his bold head 'bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared himself with his good arms in lusty stroke to th' shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bowed, as stooping to relieve him. i not doubt he came alive to land."], ["no, no, he's gone.", "sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss, that would not bless our europe with your daughter, but rather loose her to an african, where she at least is banished from your eye, who hath cause to wet the grief on 't.", "prithee, peace.", "you were kneeled to and importuned otherwise by all of us, and the fair soul herself weighed between loathness and obedience, at which end o' th' beam should bow. we have lost your son, i fear, forever. milan and naples have more widows in them of this business' making than we bring men to comfort them. the fault's your own.", "so is the dearest o' th' loss.", "my lord sebastian, the truth you speak doth lack some gentleness and time to speak it in. you rub the sore when you should bring the plaster.", "very well.", "and most chirurgeonly.", "alonso it is foul weather in us all, good sir, when you are cloudy."], ["foul weather?", "very foul.", "had i plantation of this isle, my lord", "he'd sow 't with nettle seed.", "or docks, or mallows.", "and were the king on 't, what would i do?", "'scape being drunk for want of wine.", "i' th' commonwealth i would by contraries execute all things. for no kind of traffic would i admit. no name of magistrate. letters should not be known. riches, poverty, and use of service none. contract, succession, bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard none. no use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil. no occupation. all men idle, all. and women too, but innocent and pure. no sovereignty", "yet he would be king on 't.", "the latter end of his commonwealth forgets the beginning.", "all things in common nature should produce without sweat or endeavor. treason, felony, sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine, would i not have. but nature should bring forth of its own kind all foison, all abundance, to feed my innocent people."], ["no marrying 'mong his subjects?", "none, man. all idle. whores and knaves.", "i would with such perfection govern, sir, t' excel the golden age.", "'save his majesty!", "long live gonzalo!", "alonso and do you mark me, sir?", "prithee, no more. thou dost talk nothing to me.", "i do well believe your highness, and did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh at nothing.", "'twas you we laughed at.", "who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you. so you may continue and laugh at nothing still.", "what a blow was there given!", "an it had not fallen flat-long.", "you are gentlemen of brave mettle. you would lift the moon out of her sphere if she would continue in it five weeks without changing."], ["we would so, and then go a-batfowling.", "gonzalo nay, good my lord, be not angry.", "no, i warrant you. i will not adventure my discretion so weakly. will you laugh me asleep, for i am very heavy?", "go sleep, and hear us.", "what, all so soon asleep? i wish mine eyes would with themselves shut up my thoughts. i find they are inclined to do so.", "please you, sir, do not omit the heavy offer of it. it seldom visits sorrow. when it doth, it is a comforter.", "we two, my lord, will guard your person while you take your rest and watch your safety.", "thank you. wondrous heavy."], ["what a strange drowsiness possesses them!", "it is the quality o' th' climate.", "why doth it not then our eyelids sink? i find not myself disposed to sleep.", "nor i. my spirits are nimble. they fell together all, as by consent. they dropped, as by a thunderstroke. what might, worthy sebastian, o, what might ? no more. and yet methinks i see it in thy face, what thou shouldst be. th' occasion speaks thee, and my strong imagination sees a crown dropping upon thy head.", "what, art thou waking?", "do you not hear me speak?", "i do, and surely it is a sleepy language, and thou speak'st out of thy sleep. what is it thou didst say? this is a strange repose, to be asleep with eyes wide open, standing, speaking, moving, and yet so fast asleep.", "noble sebastian, thou let'st thy fortune sleep die, rather wink'st whiles thou art waking.", "thou dost snore distinctly. there's meaning in thy snores."], ["i am more serious than my custom. you must be so too if heed me, which to do trebles thee o'er.", "well, i am standing water.", "i'll teach you how to flow.", "do so. to ebb hereditary sloth instructs me.", "oh, if you but knew how you the purpose cherish whiles thus you mock it! how, in stripping it, you more invest it! ebbing men indeed most often do so near the bottom run by their own fear or sloth.", "prithee, say on. the setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim a matter from thee, and a birth indeed which throes thee much to yield.", "thus, sir: although this lord of weak remembrance this, who shall be of as little memory when he is earthed hath here almost persuade (for he's a spirit of persuasion only, professes to persuade) the king his son's alive, 'tis as impossible that he's undrowned and he that sleeps here swims."], ["i have no hope that he's undrowned.", "oh, out of that \"no hope\" what great hope have you! no hope that way is another way so high a hope that even ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond, but doubt discovery there. will you grant with me that ferdinand is drowned?", "he's gone.", "then, tell me, who's the next heir of naples?", "claribel.", "she that is queen of tunis; she that dwells ten leagues beyond man's life; she that from naples can have no note, unless the sun were post the man i' th' moon's too slow till newborn chins be rough and razorable; she that from whom we all were sea-swallowed, though some cast again, and by that destiny to perform an act whereof what's past is prologue, what to come in yours and my discharge.", "what stuff is this? how say you? 'tis true, my brother's daughter's queen of tunis, so is she heir of naples, 'twixt which regions there is some space.", "a space whose every cubit seems to cry out, \"how shall that claribel measure us back to naples? keep in tunis,"], ["and let sebastian wake.\" say this were death that now hath seized them. why, they were no worse than now they are. there be that can rule naples as well as he that sleeps, lords that can prate as amply and unnecessarily as this gonzalo. i myself could make a chough of as deep chat. oh, that you bore the mind that i do, what a sleep were this for your advancement! do you understand me?", "methinks i do.", "and how does your content tender your own good fortune?", "i remember you did supplant your brother prospero.", "true. and look how well my garments sit upon me, much feater than before. my brother's servants were then my fellows. now they are my men.", "but, for your conscience?", "ay, sir. where lies that? if 'twere a kibe, 'twould put me to my slipper. but i feel not this deity in my bosom. twenty consciences, that stand 'twixt me and milan, candied be they and melt ere they molest! here lies your brother, no better than the earth he lies upon, if he were that which now he's like that's dead whom i, with this obedient steel, three inches of it, can lay to bed for ever; whiles you, doing thus, to the perpetual wink for aye might put this ancient morsel, this sir prudence, who"], ["should not upbraid our course. for all the rest, they'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk. they'll tell the clock to any business that we say befits the hour.", "thy case, dear friend, shall be my precedent. as thou got'st milan, i'll come by naples. draw thy sword. one stroke shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest. and i the king shall love thee.", "draw together. and when i rear my hand, do you the like, to fall it on gonzalo.", "o, but one word. antonio", "gonzalo my master through his art foresees the danger that you, his friend, are, and sends me forth for else his project dies to keep them living. gonzalo , . , ."], ["then let us both be sudden.", "now, good angels preserve the king!", "why, how now? ho, awake!", "why are you drawn? wherefore this ghastly looking?", "what's the matter?", "whiles we stood here securing your repose, even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing like bulls, or rather lions. did 't not wake you? it struck mine ear most terribly.", "i heard nothing.", "oh, 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear, to make an earthquake! sure, it was the roar of a whole herd of lions.", "heard you this, gonzalo?", "upon mine honor, sir, i heard a humming, and that a strange one too, which did awake me. i shaked you, sir, and cried. as mine eyes opened, i saw their weapons drawn. there was a noise, that's verily. 'tis best we stand upon our guard, or that we quit this place. let's draw our weapons."], ["lead off this ground, and let's make further search for my poor son.", "heavens keep him from these beasts! for he is, sure, i' th' island.", "lead away.", "prospero my lord shall know what i have done. so, king, go safely on to seek thy son."], ["all the infections that the sun sucks up from bogs, fens, flats, on prosper fall and make him by inchmeal a disease! his spirits hear me and yet i needs must curse. but they'll nor pinch, fright me with urchin-shows, pitch me i' th' mire, nor lead me like a firebrand in the dark out of my way, unless he bid 'em. but for every trifle are they set upon me, sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me, and after bite me, then like hedgehogs which lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount their pricks at my footfall. sometime am i all wound with adders who with cloven tongues do hiss me into madness.", "lo, now, lo! here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me for bringing wood in slowly. i'll fall flat. perchance he will not mind me.", "here's neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all. and another storm brewing, i hear it sing i' th' wind. yond same black cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor. if it should thunder as it did before, i know not where to hide my head. yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by pailfuls. caliban"], ["what have we here? a man or a fish? dead or alive? a fish. he smells like a fish, a very ancient and fish-like smell, a kind of not-of-the-newest poor-john. a strange fish! were i in england now, as once i was, and had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but would give a piece of silver. there would this monster make a man. any strange beast there makes a man. when they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a dead indian. legged like a man and his fins like arms! warm, o' my troth. i do now let loose my opinion, hold it no longer: this is no fish, but an islander that hath lately suffered by a thunderbolt.", "alas, the storm is come again! my best way is to creep under his gaberdine. there is no other shelter hereabouts. misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows. i will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past.", ", this is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral. well, here's my comfort. , , . ,"], [", . .", "do not torment me. oh!", "what's the matter? have we devils here? do you put tricks upon 's with savages and men of ind, ha? i have not 'scaped drowning to be afeard now of your four legs. or it hath been said, \"as proper a man as ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground,\" and it shall be said so again while stephano breathes at' nostrils.", "the spirit torments me. oh!", "this is some monster of the isle with four legs who hath got, as i take it, an ague. where the devil should he learn our language? i will give him some relief if it be but for that. if i can recover him and keep him tame and get to naples with him, he's a present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's leather.", "do not torment me, prithee. i'll bring my wood home faster.", "he's in his fit now and does not talk after the wisest. he shall taste of my bottle. if he have never drunk wine afore, it will go near to remove his fit. if i can recover him and keep him tame, i will not take too much for him. he shall pay for him that hath him, and that soundly."], ["thou dost me yet but little hurt. thou wilt anon, i know it by thy trembling. now prosper works upon thee.", "caliban come on your ways. open your mouth. here is that which will give language to you, cat. open your mouth. this will shake your shaking, i can tell you, and that soundly. you cannot tell who's your friend. open your chaps again.", "i should know that voice. it should be but he is drowned, and these are devils. oh, defend me!", "four legs and two voices a most delicate monster. his forward voice now is to speak well of his friend. his backward voice is to utter foul speeches and to detract. if all the wine in my bottle will recover him, i will help his ague. come. caliban amen! i will pour some in thy other mouth.", "stephano!", "doth thy other mouth call me? mercy, mercy! this is a devil, and no monster. i will leave him. i have no long spoon.", "stephano! if thou beest stephano, touch me and speak to me. for i am trinculo be not afeard thy good friend trinculo.", "if thou beest trinculo, come forth. i'll pull thee by the lesser legs. if any be trinculo's legs, these are they. trinculo"], ["thou art very trinculo indeed! how camest thou to be the siege of this mooncalf? can he vent trinculos?", "i took him to be killed with a thunderstroke. but art thou not drowned, stephano? i hope now thou art not drowned. is the storm overblown? i hid me under the dead mooncalf's gaberdine for fear of the storm. and art thou living, stephano? o stephano, two neapolitans 'scaped! stephano", "prithee, do not turn me about. my stomach is not constant.", "these be fine things, an if they be not sprites. that's a brave god and bears celestial liquor. i will kneel to him.", "trinculo how didst thou 'scape? how camest thou hither? swear by this bottle how thou camest hither. i escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors heaved o'erboard, by this bottle, which i made of the bark of a tree with mine own hands since i was cast ashore.", "stephano i'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject, for the liquor is not earthly.", "trinculo here. swear then how thou escapedst.", "swum ashore, man, like a duck. i can swim like a duck, i'll be sworn.", "here, kiss the book. though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made like a goose."], ["o stephano, hast any more of this?", "the whole butt, man. my cellar is in a rock by th' seaside where my wine is hid. how now, mooncalf? how does thine ague?", "hast thou not dropped from heaven?", "out o' th' moon, i do assure thee. i was the man i' the moon when time was.", "i have seen thee in her and i do adore thee. my mistress showed me thee and thy dog and thy bush.", "come, swear to that, kiss the book. i will furnish it anon with new contents, swear.", "by this good light, this is a very shallow monster. i afeard of him! a very weak monster. the man i' th' moon! a most poor credulous monster. well drawn, monster, in good sooth!", "stephano i'll show thee every fertile inch o' th' island. and i will kiss thy foot. i prithee, be my god.", "by this light, a most perfidious and drunken monster. when 's god's asleep, he'll rob his bottle."], ["stephano i'll kiss thy foot. i'll swear myself thy subject.", "come on then. down, and swear.", "i shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster. a most scurvy monster. i could find in my heart to beat him", "caliban come, kiss.", "but that the poor monster's in drink. an abominable monster!", "i'll show thee the best springs. i'll pluck thee berries. i'll fish for thee and get thee wood enough. a plague upon the tyrant that i serve! i'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee, thou wondrous man.", "a most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a poor drunkard.", "stephano i prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow. and i with my long nails will dig thee pignuts, show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how to snare the nimble marmoset. i'll bring thee to clustering filberts, and sometimes i'll get thee young scamels from the rock. wilt thou go with me?", "i prithee now, lead the way without any more talking. trinculo, the king and all our company else being drowned, we will inherit here. here, bear my bottle. fellow trinculo, we'll fill him by and by again."], [".", "a howling monster, a drunken monster.", ", , . .", "o brave monster! lead the way."], ["there be some sports are painful, and their labor delight in them sets off. some kinds of baseness are nobly undergone. and most poor matters point to rich ends. this my mean task would be as heavy to me as odious, but the mistress which i serve quickens what's dead and makes my labors pleasures. oh, she is ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed, and he's composed of harshness. i must remove some thousands of these logs and pile them up, upon a sore injunction. my sweet mistress weeps when she sees me work, and says such baseness had never like executor. i forget, but these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labors, most busiest when i do it.", "alas now, pray you, work not so hard. i would the lightning had burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile! pray, set it down and rest you. when this burns, 'twill weep for having wearied you. my father is hard at study. pray now, rest yourself. he's safe for these three hours."], ["o most dear mistress, the sun will set before i shall discharge what i must strive to do.", "if you'll sit down, i'll bear your logs the while. pray, give me that. i'll carry it to the pile.", "no, precious creature. i had rather crack my sinews, break my back, than you should such dishonor undergo while i sit lazy by.", "it would become me as well as it does you, and i should do it with much more ease, for my good will is to it and yours it is against.", "poor worm, thou art infected! this visitation shows it.", "you look wearily.", "no, noble mistress. 'tis fresh morning with me when you are by at night. i do beseech you chiefly that i might set it in my prayers what is your name?", "miranda. o my father, i have broke your hest to say so!", "admired miranda! indeed the top of admiration, worth what's dearest to th' world! full many a lady i have eyed with best regard and many a time"], ["th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage brought my too diligent ear. for several virtues have i liked several women. never any with so full soul but some defect in her did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed and put it to the foil. but you, o you, so perfect and so peerless, are created of every creature's best.", "i do not know one of my sex, no woman's face remember save, from my glass, mine own. nor have i seen more that i may call men than you, good friend, and my dear father. how features are abroad i am skill-less of, but, by my modesty, the jewel in my dower, i would not wish any companion in the world but you, nor can imagination form a shape besides yourself to like of. but i prattle something too wildly, and my father's precepts i therein do forget.", "i am in my condition a prince, miranda i do think, a king; i would, not so! and would no more endure this wooden slavery than to suffer the flesh-fly blow my mouth. hear my soul speak. the very instant that i saw you did my heart fly to your service, there resides to make me slave to it, and for your sake am i this patient log-man.", "do you love me?", "o heaven, o earth, bear witness to this sound and crown what i profess with kind event"], ["if i speak true! if hollowly, invert what best is boded me to mischief! i beyond all limit of what else i' th' world do love, prize, honor you.", "i am a fool to weep at what i am glad of.", "fair encounter of two most rare affections! heavens rain grace on that which breeds between 'em!", "wherefore weep you?", "at mine unworthiness, that dare not offer what i desire to give, and much less take what i shall die to want. but this is trifling, and all the more it seeks to hide itself the bigger bulk it shows. hence, bashful cunning, and prompt me, plain and holy innocence! i am your wife if you will marry me. if not, i'll die your maid. to be your fellow you may deny me, but i'll be your servant whether you will or no.", "my mistress, dearest, and i thus humble ever.", "my husband, then?", "ay, with a heart as willing as bondage e'er of freedom. here's my hand.", "and mine, with my heart in 't. and now farewell till half an hour hence."], ["a thousand thousand!", "so glad of this as they i cannot be, who are surprised withal. but my rejoicing at nothing can be more. i'll to my book, for yet ere supper-time must i perform much business appertaining."], ["tell not me. when the butt is out, we will drink water. not a drop before. therefore bear up and board 'em. servant- monster, drink to me.", "\"servant-monster\"? the folly of this island. they say there's but five upon this isle. we are three of them. if th' other two be brained like us, the state totters.", "drink, servant-monster, when i bid thee. thy eyes are almost set in thy head.", "where should they be set else? he were a brave monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.", "my man-monster hath drowned his tongue in sack. for my part, the sea cannot drown me. i swam, ere i could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off and on. by this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.", "your lieutenant, if you list. he's no standard.", "we'll not run, monsieur monster.", "nor go neither. but you'll lie like dogs, and yet say nothing neither."], ["mooncalf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a good mooncalf.", "how does thy honor? let me lick thy shoe. trinculo i'll not serve him. he's not valiant.", "caliban thou liest, most ignorant monster. i am in case to justle a constable. why, thou deboshed fish, thou, was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack as i today? wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but half a fish and half a monster?", "stephano lo, how he mocks me! wilt thou let him, mylord?", "\"lord,\" quoth he? that a monster should be such a natural!", "stephano lo, lo, again! bite him to death, i prithee.", "trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head. if you prove a mutineer, the next tree. the poor monster's my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.", "i thank my noble lord. wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suit i made to thee?", "marry, will i. kneel and repeat it. i will stand, and so shall trinculo."], ["as i told thee before, i am subject to a tyrant, a sorcerer that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.", "thou liest.", "trinculo thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou! i would my valiant master would destroy thee. i do not lie.", "trinculo, if you trouble him any more in 's tale, by this hand, i will supplant some of your teeth.", "why, i said nothing.", "mum, then, and no more. proceed.", "i say, by sorcery he got this isle. from me he got it. if thy greatness will revenge it on him for i know thou darest, but this thing dare not", "that's most certain.", "thou shalt be lord of it and i'll serve thee.", "how now shall this be compassed? canst thou bring me to th' party?", "yea, yea, my lord. i'll yield him thee asleep, where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.", "thou liest. thou canst not."], ["what a pied ninny's this! thou scurvy patch! i do beseech thy greatness, give him blows and take his bottle from him. when that's gone, he shall drink naught but brine, for i'll not show him where the quick freshes are.", "trinculo, run into no further danger. interrupt the monster one word further, and, by this hand, i'll turn my mercy out o' doors and make a stockfish of thee.", "why, what did i? i did nothing. i'll go farther off.", "didst thou not say he lied?", "thou liest.", "trinculo do i so? take thou that. trinculo as you like this, give me the lie another time.", "i did not give the lie. out o' your wits and hearing too? a pox o' your bottle! this can sack and drinking do. a murrain on your monster, and the devil take your fingers!", "ha, ha, ha!", "now, forward with your tale. prithee, stand farther off.", "beat him enough. after a little time, i'll beat him too.", "stand farther. come, proceed."], ["why, as i told thee, 'tis a custom with him, i' th' afternoon to sleep. there thou mayst brain him, having first seized his books; or with a log batter his skull; or paunch him with a stake; or cut his weasand with thy knife. remember first to possess his books, for without them he's but a sot, as i am, nor hath not one spirit to command. they all do hate him as rootedly as i. burn but his books. he has brave utensils for so he calls them which when he has a house, he'll deck withal. and that most deeply to consider is the beauty of his daughter. he himself calls her a nonpareil. i never saw a woman, but only sycorax my dam and she. but she as far surpasseth sycorax as great'st does least.", "is it so brave a lass?", "ay, lord. she will become thy bed, i warrant. and bring thee forth brave brood.", "monster, i will kill this man. his daughter and i will be king and queen save our graces! and trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys. dost thou like the plot, trinculo?", "excellent.", "give me thy hand. i am sorry i beat thee. but while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.", "within this half hour will he be asleep. wilt thou destroy him then?"], ["ay, on mine honor.", "this will i tell my master.", "thou makest me merry. i am full of pleasure. let us be jocund. will you troll the catch you taught me but whilere?", "at thy request, monster, i will do reason, any reason. come on, trinculo, let us sing. , . .", "that's not the tune.", "what is this same?", "this is the tune of our catch, played by the picture of nobody.", "if thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness. if thou beest a devil, take 't as thou list.", "o, forgive me my sins!", "he that dies pays all debts. i defy thee! mercy upon us!", "art thou afeard?"], ["no, monster, not i.", "be not afeard. the isle is full of noises, sounds, and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not. sometimes a thousand twangling instruments will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices that, if i then had waked after long sleep, will make me sleep again. and then, in dreaming, the clouds methought would open and show riches ready to drop upon me, that when i waked i cried to dream again.", "this will prove a brave kingdom to me, where i shall have my music for nothing.", "when prospero is destroyed.", "that shall be by and by. i remember the story.", "the sound is going away. let's follow it, and after do our work.", "lead, monster; we'll follow. i would i could see this taborer. he lays it on.", "wilt come? i'll follow, stephano."], ["alonso by 'r lakin, i can go no further, sir. my old bones ache. here's a maze trod indeed through forthrights and meanders. by your patience, i needs must rest me.", "old lord, i cannot blame thee, who am myself attached with weariness to th' dulling of my spirits. sit down and rest. even here i will put off my hope and keep it no longer for my flatterer. he is drowned whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks our frustrate search on land. well, let him go.", "sebastian i am right glad that he's so out of hope. do not for one repulse forego the purpose that you resolved t' effect.", "antonio the next advantage will we take throughly.", "sebastian let it be tonight, for now they are oppressed with travel. they will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance as when they are fresh."], ["antonio i say, tonight. no more.", "what harmony is this? my good friends, hark!", "marvelous sweet music!", "give us kind keepers, heavens! what were these?", "a living drollery. now i will believe that there are unicorns, that in arabia there is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix at this hour reigning there.", "i'll believe both and what does else want credit, come to me, and i'll be sworn 'tis true. travelers ne'er did lie, though fools at home condemn 'em.", "if in naples i should report this now, would they believe me? if i should say, i saw such islanders for, certes, these are people of the island who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet note, their manners are more gentle-kind than of our human generation you shall find many nay, almost any.", "honest lord, thou hast said well, for some of you there present are worse than devils."], ["i cannot too much muse such shapes, such gesture, and such sound, expressing, although they want the use of tongue, a kind of excellent dumb discourse.", "praise in departing.", "they vanished strangely.", "no matter, since they have left their viands behind, for we have stomachs. will 't please you taste of what is here?", "not i.", "faith, sir, you need not fear. when we were boys, who would believe that there were mountaineers dewlapped like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em wallets of flesh, or that there were such men whose heads stood in their breasts? which now we find each putter-out of five for one will bring us good warrant of.", "i will stand to and feed, although my last. no matter, since i feel the best is past. brother, my lord the duke, stand to and do as we."], ["alonso, antonio, sebastian you are three men of sin, whom destiny, that hath to instrument this lower world and what is in 't, the never-surfeited sea hath caused to belch up you and on this island where man doth not inhabit, you 'mongst men being most unfit to live. i have made you mad, and even with suchlike valor men hang and drown their proper selves. you fools, i and my fellows are ministers of fate. the elements of whom your swords are tempered may as well wound the loud winds or with bemocked-at stabs kill the still-closing waters as diminish one dowl that's in my plume. my fellow ministers are like invulnerable. if you could hurt, your swords are now too massy for your strengths and will not be uplifted. but remember for that's my business to you that you three from milan did supplant good prospero, exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it, him and his innocent child. for which foul deed the powers delaying, not forgetting have incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures, against your peace. thee of thy son, alonso, they have bereft, and do pronounce by me lingering perdition, worse than any death can be at once, shall step by step attend you and your ways; whose wraths to guard you from which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls upon your heads is nothing but hearts' sorrow and a clear life ensuing."], ["bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou performed, my ariel. a grace it had, devouring. of my instruction hast thou nothing bated in what thou hadst to say. so with good life and observation strange, my meaner ministers their several kinds have done. my high charms work and these mine enemies are all knit up in their distractions. they now are in my power, and in these fits i leave them while i visit young ferdinand, whom they suppose is drowned, and his and mine loved darling.", "alonso i' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand you in this strange stare?", "oh, it is monstrous, monstrous. methought the billows spoke and told me of it, the winds did sing it to me, and the thunder, that deep and dreadful organ pipe, pronounced the name of prosper. it did bass my trespass. therefore my son i' th' ooze is bedded, and i'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded and with him there lie mudded."], ["but one fiend at a time, i'll fight their legions o'er.", "i'll be thy second.", "all three of them are desperate. their great guilt, like poison given to work a great time after, now 'gins to bite the spirits. i do beseech you that are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly and hinder them from what this ecstasy may now provoke them to.", "follow, i pray you."], ["ferdinand if i have too austerely punished you, your compensation makes amends, for i have given you here a third of mine own life or that for which i live who once again i tender to thy hand. all thy vexations were but my trials of thy love and thou hast strangely stood the test. here, afore heaven, i ratify this my rich gift. o ferdinand, do not smile at me that i boast of her, for thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise and make it halt behind her.", "i do believe it against an oracle.", "then as my gift and thine own acquisition worthily purchased, take my daughter. but if thou dost break her virgin knot before all sanctimonious ceremonies may with full and holy rite be ministered, no sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall to make this contract grow, but barren hate, sour-eyed disdain, and discord shall bestrew the union of your bed with weeds so loathly that you shall hate it both. therefore take heed, as hymen's lamps shall light you."], ["as i hope for quiet days, fair issue, and long life, with such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den, the most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion, our worser genius can shall never melt mine honor into lust to take away the edge of that day's celebration when i shall think, or phoebus' steeds are foundered, or night kept chained below.", "fairly spoke. sit then and talk with her. she is thine own. what, ariel! my industrious servant, ariel!", "what would my potent master? here i am.", "thou and thy meaner fellows your last service did worthily perform, and i must use you in such another trick. go bring the rabble, o'er whom i give thee power, here to this place. incite them to quick motion, for i must bestow upon the eyes of this young couple some vanity of mine art. it is my promise, and they expect it from me.", "presently?", "ay, with a twink.", "before you can say \"come\" and \"go,\" and breathe twice and cry \"so, so!\" each one, tripping on his toe,"], ["will be here with mop and mow. do you love me, master, no?", "dearly my delicate ariel. do not approach till thou dost hear me call.", "well, i conceive.", "ferdinand look thou be true. do not give dalliance too much the rein. the strongest oaths are straw to th' fire i' th' blood. be more abstemious, or else, goodnight your vow.", "i warrant you, sir, the white cold virgin snow upon my heart abates the ardor of my liver.", "well. now come, my ariel! bring a corollary, rather than want a spirit. appear and pertly!", "no tongue. all eyes! be silent.", "ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas; thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep, and flat meads thatched with stover, them to keep; thy banks with piond and twilld brims,"], ["which spongy april at thy hest betrims to make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy broom groves, whose shadow the dismissd bachelor loves, being lass-lorn; thy pole-clipped vineyard; and thy sea-marge, sterile and rocky hard, where thou thyself dost air the queen o' th' sky, whose watery arch and messenger am i, bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,", "here on this grass plot, in this very place, to come and sport. her peacocks fly amain. approach, rich ceres, her to entertain.", "hail, many-colored messenger, that ne'er dost disobey the wife of jupiter; who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers diffusest honey drops, refreshing showers; and with each end of thy blue bow dost crown my bosky acres and my unshrubbed down, rich scarf to my proud earth. why hath thy queen summoned me hither to this short-grassed green?", "a contract of true love to celebrate, and some donation freely to estate on the blessed lovers.", "tell me, heavenly bow, if venus or her son, as thou dost know, do now attend the queen? since they did plot the means that dusky dis my daughter got, her and her blind boy's scandaled company i have forsworn."], ["of her society be not afraid. i met her deity cutting the clouds towards paphos, and her son dove-drawn with her. here thought they to have done some wanton charm upon this man and maid, whose vows are that no bed-right shall be paid till hymen's torch be lighted but in vain. mars's hot minion is returned again. her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows, swears he will shoot no more, but play with sparrows and be a boy right out.", "highest queen of state, great juno, comes. i know her by her gait.", "how does my bounteous sister? go with me to bless this twain that they may prosperous be, and honored in their issue.", ", , . ."], [", , , . . .", "this is a most majestic vision, and harmonious charmingly. may i be bold to think these spirits?", "spirits, which by mine art i have from their confines called to enact my present fancies.", "let me live here ever. so rare a wondered father and a wife makes this place paradise.", "sweet now, silence. juno and ceres whisper seriously. there's something else to do. hush and be mute, or else our spell is marred.", "you nymphs, called naiads of the windring brooks, with your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks, leave your crisp channels and on this green land answer your summons, juno does command."], ["come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate a contract of true love. be not too late.", "you sunburnt sicklemen of august weary, come hither from the furrow and be merry. make holiday. your rye-straw hats put on, and these fresh nymphs encounter every one in country footing.", "i had forgot that foul conspiracy of the beast caliban and his confederates against my life. the minute of their plot is almost come. well done. avoid, no more!", "miranda this is strange. your father's in some passion that works him strongly.", "never till this day saw i him touched with anger so distempered.", "ferdinand you do look, my son, in a moved sort, as if you were dismayed. be cheerful, sir. our revels now are ended. these our actors, as i foretold you, were all spirits and are melted into air, into thin air."], ["and like the baseless fabric of this vision, the cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces, the solemn temples, the great globe itself yea, all which it inherit shall dissolve, and like this insubstantial pageant faded, leave not a rack behind. we are such stuff as dreams are made on, and our little life is rounded with a sleep. sir, i am vexed. bear with my weakness. my old brain is troubled. be not disturbed with my infirmity. if you be pleased, retire into my cell and there repose. a turn or two i'll walk to still my beating mind.", "we wish your peace.", "come with a thought. i thank thee, ariel. come.", "thy thoughts i cleave to. what's thy pleasure?", "spirit, we must prepare to meet with caliban.", "ay, my commander. when i presented ceres, i thought to have told thee of it, but i feared lest i might anger thee.", "say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?"], ["i told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking, so full of valor that they smote the air for breathing in their faces, beat the ground for kissing of their feet yet always bending towards their project. then i beat my tabor, at which, like unbacked colts, they pricked their ears, advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses as they smelt music. so i charmed their ears that, calflike, they my lowing followed through toothed briers, sharp furzes, pricking gorse, and thorns, which entered their frail shins. at last i left them i' th' filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell, there dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake o'erstunk their feet.", "this was well done, my bird. thy shape invisible retain thou still. the trumpery in my house, go bring it hither for stale to catch these thieves.", "i go, i go.", "a devil, a born devil on whose nature nurture can never stick, on whom my pains, humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost. and as with age his body uglier grows, so his mind cankers. i will plague them all, even to roaring.", "come, hang them on this line."], ["pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not hear a foot fall. we now are near his cell.", "monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless fairy, has done little better than played the jack with us.", "monster, i do smell all horse piss, at which my nose is in great indignation.", "so is mine. do you hear, monster? if i should take a displeasure against you, look you", "thou wert but a lost monster.", "good my lord, give me thy favor still. be patient, for the prize i'll bring thee to shall hoodwink this mischance. therefore speak softly. all's hushed as midnight yet.", "ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool", "there is not only disgrace and dishonor in that, monster, but an infinite loss.", "that's more to me than my wetting. yet this is your harmless fairy, monster.", "i will fetch off my bottle, though i be o'er ears for my labor."], ["prithee, my king, be quiet. seest thou here, this is the mouth o' th' cell. no noise, and enter. do that good mischief which may make this island thine own for ever, and i, thy caliban, for aye thy foot-licker.", "give me thy hand. i do begin to have bloody thoughts.", "o king stephano! o peer, o worthy stephano, look what a wardrobe here is for thee!", "let it alone, thou fool. it is but trash.", "oh, ho, monster, we know what belongs to a frippery. o king stephano!", "put off that gown, trinculo. by this hand, i'll have that gown.", "thy grace shall have it.", "the dropsy drown this fool! what do you mean to dote thus on such luggage? let's alone, and do the murder first. if he awake, from toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches, make us strange stuff.", "be you quiet, monster. mistress line, is not this my jerkin? now is the jerkin under the line. now, jerkin, you are like to lose your hair and prove a bald jerkin."], ["do, do. we steal by line and level, an 't like your grace.", "i thank thee for that jest. here's a garment for 't. wit shall not go unrewarded while i am king of this country. \"steal by line and level\" is an excellent pass of pate. there's another garment for 't.", "monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers, and away with the rest.", "i will have none on 't. we shall lose our time, and all be turned to barnacles or to apes with foreheads villainous low.", "monster, lay to your fingers. help to bear this away where my hogshead of wine is, or i'll turn you out of my kingdom. go to, carry this.", "and this.", "ay, and this.", "hey, mountain, hey!", "silver. there it goes, silver!"], ["fury, fury! there, tyrant, there. hark, hark!", "go charge my goblins that they grind their joints with dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews with agd cramps, and more pinch-spotted make them than pard or cat o' mountain.", "hark, they roar.", "let them be hunted soundly. at this hour lie at my mercy all mine enemies. shortly shall all my labors end, and thou shalt have the air at freedom. for a little follow, and do me service."], ["now does my project gather to a head. my charms crack not, my spirits obey, and time goes upright with his carriage. how's the day?", "on the sixth hour, at which time, my lord, you said our work should cease.", "i did say so when first i raised the tempest. say, my spirit, how fares the king and 's followers?", "confined together in the same fashion as you gave in charge, just as you left them, all prisoners, sir, in the line grove which weather-fends your cell. they cannot budge till your release. the king, his brother, and yours, abide all three distracted, and the remainder mourning over them, brimful of sorrow and dismay. but chiefly him that you termed, sir, \"the good old lord gonzalo,\" his tears run down his beard like winter's drops from eaves of reeds. your charm so strongly works 'em that if you now beheld them, your affections would become tender.", "dost thou think so, spirit?", "mine would, sir, were i human."], ["and mine shall. hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling of their afflictions, and shall not myself, one of their kind, that relish all as sharply passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art? though with their high wrongs i am struck to th' quick, yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury do i take part. the rarer action is in virtue than in vengeance. they being penitent, the sole drift of my purpose doth extend not a frown further. go release them, ariel. my charms i'll break, their senses i'll restore, and they shall be themselves.", "i'll fetch them, sir.", "ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, and groves, and ye that on the sands with printless foot do chase the ebbing neptune and do fly him when he comes back; you demi-puppets that by moonshine do the green sour ringlets make, whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime is to make midnight mushrooms, that rejoice to hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid, weak masters though ye be, i have bedimmed the noontide sun, called forth the mutinous winds, and 'twixt the green sea and the azured vault set roaring war to th' dread rattling thunder have i given fire, and rifted jove's stout oak"], ["with his own bolt; the strong-based promontory have i made shake, and by the spurs plucked up the pine and cedar; graves at my command have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth by my so potent art. but this rough magic i here abjure, and when i have required some heavenly music, which even now i do, to work mine end upon their senses that this airy charm is for, i'll break my staff, bury it certain fathoms in the earth, and deeper than did ever plummet sound i'll drown my book.", "a solemn air and the best comforter to an unsettled fancy cure thy brains, now useless, boiled within thy skull. there stand, for you are spell-stopped. gonzalo holy gonzalo, honorable man, mine eyes, ev'n sociable to the show of thine, fall fellowly drops. the charm dissolves apace, and as the morning steals upon the night, melting the darkness, so their rising senses begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle their clearer reason. gonzalo o good gonzalo, my true preserver and a loyal sir"], ["to him you follow'st, i will pay thy graces home both in word and deed. alonso most cruelly didst thou, alonso, use me and my daughter. thy brother was a furtherer in the act. sebastian thou art pinched for 't now, sebastian. antonio flesh and blood, you brother mine, that entertained ambition, expelled remorse and nature, whom, with sebastian, whose inward pinches therefore are most strong, would here have killed your king i do forgive thee, unnatural though thou art. their understanding begins to swell, and the approaching tide will shortly fill the reasonable shore that now lies foul and muddy. not one of them that yet looks on me, or would know me. ariel ariel, fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell. i will discase me, and myself present as i was sometime milan. quickly, spirit. thou shalt ere long be free.", "prospero . . . . .", "why, that's my dainty ariel. i shall miss thee, but yet thou shalt have freedom. so, so, so. to the king's ship, invisible as thou art. there shalt thou find the mariners asleep"], ["under the hatches. the master and the boatswain being awake, enforce them to this place, and presently, i prithee.", "i drink the air before me, and return or ere your pulse twice beat.", "all torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement inhabits here. some heavenly power guide us out of this fearful country!", "alonso behold, sir king, the wrongd duke of milan, prospero. for more assurance that a living prince does now speak to thee, i embrace thy body. and to thee and thy company i bid a hearty welcome. alonso", "whe'er thou beest he or no, or some enchanted trifle to abuse me, as late i have been, i not know. thy pulse beats as of flesh and blood. and since i saw thee, th' affliction of my mind amends, with which i fear a madness held me. this must crave an if this be at all a most strange story. thy dukedom i resign and do entreat thou pardon me my wrongs. but how should prospero be living and be here?", "gonzalo first, noble friend, let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannot be measured or confined."], ["whether this be or be not, i'll not swear.", "you do yet taste some subtleties o' th' isle, that will not let you believe things certain. welcome, my friends all. sebastian antonio but you, my brace of lords, were i so minded, i here could pluck his highness' frown upon you and justify you traitors. at this time i will tell no tales.", "the devil speaks in him.", "no. antonio for you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother would even infect my mouth, i do forgive thy rankest fault, all of them, and require my dukedom of thee, which perforce, i know, thou must restore.", "if thou beest prospero, give us particulars of thy preservation, how thou hast met us here, whom three hours since were wracked upon this shore, where i have lost how sharp the point of this remembrance is! my dear son ferdinand.", "i am woe for 't, sir.", "irreparable is the loss, and patience says it is past her cure."], ["i rather think you have not sought her help, of whose soft grace for the like loss i have her sovereign aid, and rest myself content.", "you the like loss?", "as great to me as late. and supportable to make the dear loss have i means much weaker than you may call to comfort you, for i have lost my daughter.", "a daughter? o heavens, that they were living both in naples, the king and queen there! that they were, i wish myself were mudded in that oozy bed where my son lies. when did you lose your daughter?", "in this last tempest. i perceive these lords at this encounter do so much admire that they devour their reason and scarce think their eyes do offices of truth, their words are natural breath. but howsoev'r you have been justled from your senses, know for certain that i am prospero and that very duke which was thrust forth of milan, who most strangely upon this shore where you were wracked, was landed, to be the lord on 't."], ["no more yet of this, for 'tis a chronicle of day by day, not a relation for a breakfast, nor befitting this first meeting. alonso welcome, sir. this cell's my court. here have i few attendants and subjects none abroad. pray you, look in. my dukedom since you have given me again, i will requite you with as good a thing, at least bring forth a wonder to content ye as much as me my dukedom.", "ferdinand sweet lord, you play me false.", "no, my dearest love, i would not for the world.", "yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle, and i would call it fair play.", "if this prove a vision of the island, one dear son shall i twice lose.", "a most high miracle!", "alonso though the seas threaten, they are merciful. i have cursed them without cause."], ["now all the blessings of a glad father, compass thee about. arise, and say how thou camest here.", "oh, wonder! how many goodly creatures are there here! how beauteous mankind is! o brave new world, that has such people in 't!", "'tis new to thee.", "ferdinand what is this maid with whom thou wast at play? your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours. is she the goddess that hath severed us and brought us thus together?", "sir, she is mortal. but by immortal providence, she's mine. i chose her when i could not ask my father for his advice, nor thought i had one. she is daughter to this famous duke of milan, of whom so often i have heard renown but never saw before, of whom i have received a second life. and second father this lady makes him to me.", "i am hers. but oh, how oddly will it sound that i must ask my child forgiveness!", "there, sir, stop. let us not burden our remembrances with a heaviness that's gone."], ["i have inly wept, or should have spoke ere this. look down, you gods, and on this couple drop a blessd crown, for it is you that have chalked forth the way which brought us hither.", "i say amen, gonzalo.", "was milan thrust from milan, that his issue should become kings of naples? o, rejoice beyond a common joy, and set it down with gold on lasting pillars. in one voyage did claribel her husband find at tunis; and ferdinand, her brother, found a wife where he himself was lost; prospero, his dukedom in a poor isle; and all of us, ourselves when no man was his own.", "ferdinand miranda give me your hands. let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart that doth not wish you joy.", "be it so. amen.", "oh, look, sir, look, sir! here is more of us. i prophesied if a gallows were on land, this fellow could not drown. boatswain now, blasphemy, that swear'st grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore? hast thou no mouth by land? what is the news?"], ["the best news is that we have safely found our king and company. the next, our ship which, but three glasses since, we gave out split is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when we first put out to sea.", "prospero sir, all this service have i done since i went.", "ariel my tricksy spirit!", "these are not natural events. they strengthen from strange to stranger. boatswain say, how came you hither?", "if i did think, sir, i were well awake, i'd strive to tell you. we were dead of sleep and how, we know not all clapped under hatches, where but even now with strange and several noises of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains, and more diversity of sounds, all horrible, we were awaked, straightway at liberty, where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld our royal, good, and gallant ship, our master capering to eye her. on a trice, so please you, even in a dream were we divided from them and were brought moping hither.", "prospero was 't well done?", "ariel bravely, my diligence. thou shalt be free."], ["this is as strange a maze as e'er men trod, and there is in this business more than nature was ever conduct of. some oracle must rectify our knowledge.", "sir, my liege, do not infest your mind with beating on the strangeness of this business. at picked leisure which shall be shortly, single i'll resolve you which to you shall seem probable of every these happened accidents. till when, be cheerful and think of each thing well. ariel come hither, spirit. set caliban and his companions free. untie the spell.", "how fares my gracious sir? there are yet missing of your company some few odd lads that you remember not.", "every man shift for all the rest and let no man take care for himself, for all is but fortune. coraggio, bully-monster,", "if these be true spies which i wear in my head, here's a goodly sight.", "o setebos, these be brave spirits indeed! how fine my master is! i am afraid he will chastise me."], ["ha, ha! what things are these, my lord antonio? will money buy 'em?", "very like. one of them is a plain fish, and no doubt marketable.", "mark but the badges of these men, my lords, then say if they be true. caliban this misshapen knave, his mother was a witch, and one so strong that could control the moon, make flows and ebbs, and deal in her command without her power. these three have robbed me, and this demi-devil for he's a bastard one had plotted with them to take my life. two of these fellows you must know and own. this thing of darkness i acknowledge mine.", "i shall be pinched to death.", "is not this stephano, my drunken butler?", "he is drunk now. where had he wine?", "and trinculo is reeling ripe. where should they find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em? how camest thou in this pickle?", "i have been in such a pickle since i saw you last that, i fear me, will never out of my bones. i shall not fear flyblowing.", "why, how now, stephano?"], ["o, touch me not. i am not stephano, but a cramp.", "you'd be king o' th' isle, sirrah?", "i should have been a sore one then.", "caliban this is a strange thing as e'er i looked on.", "he is as disproportioned in his manners as in his shape. caliban go, sirrah, to my cell. take with you your companions. as you look to have my pardon, trim it handsomely.", "ay, that i will. and i'll be wise hereafter and seek for grace. what a thrice-double ass was i, to take this drunkard for a god and worship this dull fool!", "go to, away.", "stephano trinculo hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.", "or stole it, rather.", "sir, i invite your highness and your train to my poor cell, where you shall take your rest for this one night, which part of it i'll waste with such discourse as, i not doubt, shall make it go quick away: the story of my life and the particular accidents gone by since i came to this isle. and in the morn i'll bring you to your ship and so to naples, where i have hope to see the nuptial of these our dear-belovd solemnized, and thence retire me to my milan, where every third thought shall be my grave."], ["i long to hear the story of your life, which must take the ear strangely.", "i'll deliver all, and promise you calm seas, auspicious gales, and sail so expeditious that shall catch your royal fleet far off. ariel my ariel, chick, that is thy charge. then to the elements be free, and fare thou well! please you, draw near."], ["now my charms are all o'erthrown, and what strength i have's mine own, which is most faint. now, 'tis true, i must be here confined by you, or sent to naples. let me not, since i have my dukedom got and pardoned the deceiver, dwell in this bare island by your spell, but release me from my bands with the help of your good hands. gentle breath of yours my sails must fill, or else my project fails, which was to please. now i want spirits to enforce, art to enchant, and my ending is despair, unless i be relieved by prayer, which pierces so that it assaults mercy itself and frees all faults. as you from crimes would pardoned be, let your indulgence set me free."]], [["if music be the food of love, play on. give me excess of it that, surfeiting, the appetite may sicken, and so die. that strain again, it had a dying fall. oh, it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound, that breathes upon a bank of violets, stealing and giving odor. enough, no more. 'tis not so sweet now as it was before. o spirit of love, how quick and fresh art thou, that, notwithstanding thy capacity receiveth as the sea, nought enters there, of what validity and pitch soe'er, but falls into abatement and low price even in a minute. so full of shapes is fancy that it alone is high fantastical.", "will you go hunt, my lord?", "what, curio?", "the hart.", "why, so i do, the noblest that i have. oh, when mine eyes did see olivia first, methought she purged the air of pestilence. that instant was i turned into a hart, and my desires, like fell and cruel hounds, e'er since pursue me."], ["how now! what news from her?", "so please my lord, i might not be admitted, but from her handmaid do return this answer: the element itself, till seven years' heat, shall not behold her face at ample view, but like a cloistress, she will veiled walk and water once a day her chamber round with eye-offending brine all this to season a brother's dead love, which she would keep fresh and lasting in her sad remembrance.", "o, she that hath a heart of that fine frame to pay this debt of love but to a brother, how will she love, when the rich golden shaft hath killed the flock of all affections else that live in her, when liver, brain, and heart, these sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and filled her sweet perfections with one self king! away before me to sweet beds of flowers. love thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers."], ["what country, friends, is this?", "this is illyria, lady.", "and what should i do in illyria? my brother he is in elysium. perchance he is not drown'd. what think you, sailors?", "it is perchance that you yourself were saved.", "o, my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.", "true, madam. and, to comfort you with chance, assure yourself, after our ship did split, when you and those poor number saved with you hung on our driving boat, i saw your brother, most provident in peril, bind himself, courage and hope both teaching him the practice, to a strong mast that lived upon the sea, where, like arion on the dolphin's back, i saw him hold acquaintance with the waves so long as i could see.", "for saying so, there's gold. mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope, whereto thy speech serves for authority, the like of him. know'st thou this country?", "ay, madam, well, for i was bred and born not three hours' travel from this very place."], ["who governs here?", "a noble duke, in nature as in name.", "what is his name?", "orsino.", "orsino. i have heard my father name him. he was a bachelor then.", "and so is now, or was so very late. for but a month ago i went from hence, and then 'twas fresh in murmur as, you know, what great ones do the less will prattle of that he did seek the love of fair olivia.", "what's she?", "a virtuous maid, the daughter of a count that died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her in the protection of his son, her brother, who shortly also died, for whose dear love, they say, she hath abjured the company and sight of men.", "oh, that i served that lady and might not be delivered to the world, till i had made mine own occasion mellow, what my estate is.", "that were hard to compass, because she will admit no kind of suit, no, not the duke's."], ["there is a fair behavior in thee, captain, and though that nature with a beauteous wall doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee i will believe thou hast a mind that suits with this thy fair and outward character. i prithee and i'll pay thee bounteously conceal me what i am, and be my aid for such disguise as haply shall become the form of my intent. i'll serve this duke. thou shall present me as an eunuch to him. it may be worth thy pains, for i can sing and speak to him in many sorts of music that will allow me very worth his service. what else may hap to time i will commit. only shape thou thy silence to my wit.", "be you his eunuch, and your mute i'll be. when my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.", "i thank thee. lead me on."], ["what a plague means my niece, to take the death of her brother thus? i am sure care's an enemy to life.", "by my troth, sir toby, you must come in earlier o' nights. your cousin, my lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.", "why, let her except, before excepted.", "ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits of order.", "confine? i'll confine myself no finer than i am. these clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too. an they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.", "that quaffing and drinking will undo you: i heard my lady talk of it yesterday, and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here to be her wooer.", "who, sir andrew aguecheek?", "ay, he.", "he's as tall a man as any 's in illyria."], ["what's that to the purpose?", "why, he has three thousand ducats a year.", "ay, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats. he's a very fool and a prodigal.", "fie, that you'll say so! he plays o' the viol-de-gamboys, and speaks three or four languages word for word without book, and hath all the good gifts of nature.", "he hath indeed, almost natural, for besides that he's a fool, he's a great quarreler, and but that he hath the gift of a coward to allay the gust he hath in quarreling, 'tis thought among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave.", "by this hand, they are scoundrels and substractors that say so of him. who are they?", "they that add, moreover, he's drunk nightly in your company.", "with drinking healths to my niece. i'll drink to her as long as there is a passage in my throat and drink in illyria. he's a coward and a coistrel that will not drink to my niece till his brains turn o' th' toe like a parish top. what, wench! , for here comes sir andrew agueface.", "sir toby belch! how now, sir toby belch!", "sweet sir andrew!"], ["maria bless you, fair shrew.", "and you too, sir.", "accost, sir andrew, accost.", "what's that?", "my niece's chambermaid.", "good mistress accost, i desire better acquaintance.", "my name is mary, sir.", "good mistress mary accost", "you mistake, knight. \"accost\" is front her, board her, woo her, assail her.", "by my troth, i would not undertake her in this company. is that the meaning of \"accost\"?", "fare you well, gentlemen.", "an thou let part so, sir andrew, would thou mightst never draw sword again.", "an you part so, mistress, i would i might never draw sword again. fair lady, do you think you have fools in hand?", "sir, i have not you by the hand."], ["marry, but you shall have, and here's my hand.", "now, sir, thought is free. i pray you, bring your hand to the buttery-bar and let it drink.", "wherefore, sweetheart? what's your metaphor?", "it's dry, sir.", "why, i think so. i am not such an ass, but i can keep my hand dry. but what's your jest?", "a dry jest, sir.", "are you full of them?", "ay, sir, i have them at my fingers' ends. marry, now i let go your hand, i am barren.", "o knight, thou lackest a cup of canary. when did i see thee so put down?", "never in your life, i think, unless you see canary put me down. methinks sometimes i have no more wit than a christian or an ordinary man has. but i am a great eater of beef, and i believe that does harm to my wit.", "no question."], ["an i thought that, i'd forswear it. i'll ride home tomorrow, sir toby.", "my dear knight?", "what is \"pourquoi\"? do, or not do? i would i had bestowed that time in the tongues that i have in fencing, dancing, and bear-baiting. o, had i but followed the arts!", "then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.", "why, would that have mended my hair?", "past question, for thou seest it will not curl by nature.", "but it becomes me well enough, does 't not?", "excellent. it hangs like flax on a distaff. and i hope to see a housewife take thee between her legs and spin it off.", "faith, i'll home tomorrow, sir toby. your niece will not be seen. or if she be, it's four to one she'll none of me. the count himself here hard by woos her.", "she'll none o' the count. she'll not match above her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit. i have heard her swear 't. tut, there's life in 't, man."], ["i'll stay a month longer. i am a fellow o' th' strangest mind i' th' world. i delight in masques and revels sometimes altogether.", "art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?", "as any man in illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree of my betters. and yet i will not compare with an old man.", "what is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?", "faith, i can cut a caper.", "and i can cut the mutton to 't.", "and i think i have the back-trick simply as strong as any man in illyria.", "wherefore are these things hid? wherefore have these gifts a curtain before 'em? are they like to take dust, like mistress mall's picture? why dost thou not go to church in a galliard and come home in a coranto? my very walk should be a jig. i would not so much as make water but in a sink-a-pace. what dost thou mean? is it a world to hide virtues in? i did think, by the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star of a galliard.", "ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a dun-colored stock. shall we set about some revels?", "what shall we do else? were we not born under taurus?"], ["taurus! that's sides and heart.", "no, sir, it is legs and thighs. let me see the caper. sir andrew ha, higher! ha, ha, excellent!"], ["if the duke continue these favors towards you, cesario, you are like to be much advanced. he hath known you but three days, and already you are no stranger.", "you either fear his humor or my negligence, that you call in question the continuance of his love. is he inconstant, sir, in his favors?", "no, believe me.", "i thank you. here comes the count.", "who saw cesario, ho?", "on your attendance, my lord, here.", "viola stand you a while aloof. viola cesario, thou know'st no less but all. i have unclasped to thee the book even of my secret soul. therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her; be not denied access, stand at her doors, and tell them there thy fixed foot shall grow till thou have audience."], ["sure, my noble lord, if she be so abandoned to her sorrow as it is spoke, she never will admit me.", "be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds, rather than make unprofited return.", "say i do speak with her, my lord, what then?", "o, then unfold the passion of my love, surprise her with discourse of my dear faith: it shall become thee well to act my woes; she will attend it better in thy youth than in a nuncio's of more grave aspect.", "i think not so, my lord.", "dear lad, believe it. for they shall yet belie thy happy years that say thou art a man. diana's lip is not more smooth and rubious. thy small pipe is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound, and all is semblative a woman's part. i know thy constellation is right apt for this affair. curio some four or five attend him. all, if you will, for i myself am best when least in company. viola prosper well in this, and thou shalt live as freely as thy lord, to call his fortunes thine.", "i'll do my best to woo your lady yet, a barful strife whoe'er i woo, myself would be his wife."], ["nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or i will not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in way of thy excuse. my lady will hang thee for thy absence.", "let her hang me. he that is well hanged in this world needs to fear no colors.", "make that good.", "he shall see none to fear.", "a good lenten answer. i can tell thee where that saying was born, of \"i fear no colors.\"", "where, good mistress mary?", "in the wars. and that may you be bold to say in your foolery.", "well, god give them wisdom that have it. and those that are fools, let them use their talents.", "yet you will be hanged for being so long absent. or to be turned away, is not that as good as a hanging to you?"], ["many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage, and, for turning away, let summer bear it out.", "you are resolute, then?", "not so, neither, but i am resolved on two points.", "that if one break, the other will hold. or, if both break, your gaskins fall.", "apt, in good faith, very apt. well, go thy way. if sir toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a piece of eve's flesh as any in illyria.", "peace, you rogue, no more o' that. here comes my lady. make your excuse wisely, you were best.", "wit, an 't be thy will, put me into good fooling! those wits, that think they have thee, do very oft prove fools. and i, that am sure i lack thee, may pass for a wise man. for what says quinapalus? \"better a witty fool, than a foolish wit.\"", "god bless thee, lady!"], ["take the fool away.", "do you not hear, fellows? take away the lady.", "go to, you're a dry fool. i'll no more of you. besides, you grow dishonest.", "two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel will amend. for give the dry fool drink, then is the fool not dry. bid the dishonest man mend himself. if he mend, he is no longer dishonest. if he cannot, let the botcher mend him. anything that's mended is but patched. virtue that transgresses is but patched with sin, and sin that amends is but patched with virtue. if that this simple syllogism will serve, so. if it will not, what remedy? as there is no true cuckold but calamity, so beauty's a flower. the lady bade take away the fool. therefore, i say again, take her away.", "sir, i bade them take away you.", "misprision in the highest degree! lady, cucullus non facit monachum that's as much to say as i wear not motley in my brain. good madonna, give me leave to prove you a fool.", "can you do it?", "dexterously, good madonna."], ["make your proof.", "i must catechise you for it, madonna. good my mouse of virtue, answer me.", "well, sir, for want of other idleness, i'll bide your proof.", "good madonna, why mournest thou?", "good fool, for my brother's death.", "i think his soul is in hell, madonna.", "i know his soul is in heaven, fool.", "the more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brother's soul being in heaven. take away the fool, gentlemen.", "what think you of this fool, malvolio? doth he not mend?", "yes, and shall do till the pangs of death shake him. infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.", "god send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the better increasing your folly! sir toby will be sworn that i am no fox, but he will not pass his word for two pence that you are no fool.", "how say you to that, malvolio?", "i marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a barren rascal. i saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool that"], ["has no more brain than a stone. look you now, he's out of his guard already. unless you laugh and minister occasion to him, he is gagged. i protest i take these wise men that crow so at these set kind of fools no better than the fools' zanies.", "oh, you are sick of self-love, malvolio, and taste with a distempered appetite. to be generous, guiltless, and of free disposition is to take those things for bird-bolts that you deem cannon-bullets. there is no slander in an allowed fool, though he do nothing but rail. nor no railing in a known discreet man, though he do nothing but reprove.", "now mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speakest well of fools!", "madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires to speak with you.", "from the count orsino, is it?", "i know not, madam. 'tis a fair young man, and well attended.", "who of my people hold him in delay?", "sir toby, madam, your kinsman.", "fetch him off, i pray you. he speaks nothing but madman. fie on him!"], ["go you, malvolio. if it be a suit from the count, i am sick, or not at home. what you will, to dismiss it.", "now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and people dislike it.", "thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest son should be a fool, whose skull jove cram with brains, for here he comes one of thy kin has a most weak", "by mine honor, half-drunk. what is he at the gate, cousin?", "a gentleman.", "a gentleman? what gentleman?", "'tis a gentleman here a plague o' these pickle herring! how now, sot!", "good sir toby!", "cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by this lethargy?"], ["lechery! i defy lechery. there's one at the gate.", "ay, marry, what is he?", "let him be the devil, an he will, i care not. give me faith, say i. well, it's all one.", "what's a drunken man like, fool?", "like a drowned man, a fool and a madman. one draught above heat makes him a fool, the second mads him, and a third drowns him.", "go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my coz. for he's in the third degree of drink, he's drowned. go look after him.", "he is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look to the madman.", "madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you. i told him you were sick. he takes on him to understand so much, and therefore comes to speak with you. i told him you were asleep. he seems to have a foreknowledge of that too, and therefore comes to speak with you. what is to be said to him, lady? he's fortified against any denial."], ["tell him he shall not speak with me.", "has been told so, and he says he'll stand at your door like a sheriff's post, and be the supporter to a bench, but he'll speak with you.", "what kind o' man is he?", "why, of mankind.", "what manner of man?", "of very ill manner. he'll speak with you, will you or no.", "of what personage and years is he?", "not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy, as a squash is before 'tis a peascod, or a codling when 'tis almost an apple. 'tis with him in standing water, between boy and man. he is very well-favored, and he speaks very shrewishly. one would think his mother's milk were scarce out of him.", "let him approach. call in my gentlewoman.", "gentlewoman, my lady calls.", "give me my veil. come, throw it o'er my face. olivia we'll once more hear orsino's embassy."], ["the honorable lady of the house, which is she?", "speak to me. i shall answer for her. your will?", "most radiant, exquisite and unmatchable beauty i pray you, tell me if this be the lady of the house, for i never saw her. i would be loath to cast away my speech, for besides that it is excellently well penned, i have taken great pains to con it. good beauties, let me sustain no scorn. i am very comptible, even to the least sinister usage.", "whence came you, sir?", "i can say little more than i have studied, and that question's out of my part. good gentle one, give me modest assurance if you be the lady of the house, that i may proceed in my speech.", "are you a comedian?", "no, my profound heart. and yet, by the very fangs of malice i swear, i am not that i play. are you the lady of the house?", "if i do not usurp myself, i am.", "most certain, if you are she, you do usurp yourself, for what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve. but this is from my commission. i will on with my speech in your praise and then show you the heart of my message."], ["come to what is important in 't. i forgive you the praise.", "alas, i took great pains to study it, and 'tis poetical.", "it is the more like to be feigned. i pray you, keep it in. i heard you were saucy at my gates and allowed your approach rather to wonder at you than to hear you. if you be not mad, be gone. if you have reason, be brief. 'tis not that time of moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue.", "will you hoist sail, sir? here lies your way.", "no, good swabber, i am to hull here a little longer. some mollification for your giant, sweet lady.", "tell me your mind.", "i am a messenger.", "sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when the courtesy of it is so fearful. speak your office.", "it alone concerns your ear. i bring no overture of war, no taxation of homage. i hold the olive in my hand. my words are as full of peace as matter.", "yet you began rudely. what are you? what would you?"], ["the rudeness that hath appeared in me have i learned from my entertainment. what i am and what i would are as secret as maidenhead. to your ears, divinity. to any other's, profanation.", "give us the place alone. we will hear this divinity.", "now, sir, what is your text?", "most sweet lady", "a comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it. where lies your text?", "in orsino's bosom.", "in his bosom? in what chapter of his bosom?", "to answer by the method, in the first of his heart.", "oh, i have read it. it is heresy. have you no more to say?", "good madam, let me see your face.", "have you any commission from your lord to negotiate with my face? you are now out of your text. but we will draw the curtain and show you the picture. look you, sir, such a one i was this present. is 't not well done?"], ["excellently done, if god did all.", "'tis in grain, sir. 'twill endure wind and weather.", "'tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on. lady, you are the cruel'st she alive if you will lead these graces to the grave and leave the world no copy.", "o, sir, i will not be so hard-hearted. i will give out divers schedules of my beauty. it shall be inventoried, and every particle and utensil labeled to my will: as, item, two lips indifferent red; item, two grey eyes, with lids to them; item, one neck, one chin, and so forth. were you sent hither to praise me?", "i see you what you are, you are too proud. but, if you were the devil, you are fair. my lord and master loves you. oh, such love could be but recompensed though you were crowned the nonpareil of beauty.", "how does he love me?", "with adorations, fertile tears, with groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.", "your lord does know my mind. i cannot love him. yet i suppose him virtuous, know him noble, of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth."], ["in voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant; and in dimension and the shape of nature a gracious person. but yet i cannot love him; he might have took his answer long ago.", "if i did love you in my master's flame, with such a suffering, such a deadly life, in your denial i would find no sense; i would not understand it.", "why, what would you?", "make me a willow cabin at your gate and call upon my soul within the house. write loyal cantons of contemned love and sing them loud even in the dead of night. halloo your name to the reverberate hills and make the babbling gossip of the air cry out \"olivia!\" oh, you should not rest between the elements of air and earth, but you should pity me.", "you might do much. what is your parentage?", "above my fortunes, yet my state is well. i am a gentleman.", "get you to your lord. i cannot love him. let him send no more unless perchance you come to me again to tell me how he takes it. fare you well. i thank you for your pains. spend this for me."], ["i am no fee'd post, lady. keep your purse. my master, not myself, lacks recompense. love make his heart of flint that you shall love, and let your fervor, like my master's, be placed in contempt. farewell, fair cruelty.", "\"what is your parentage?\" \"above my fortunes, yet my state is well. i am a gentleman.\" i'll be sworn thou art; thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit, do give thee fivefold blazon. not too fast! soft, soft! unless the master were the man. how now? even so quickly may one catch the plague? methinks i feel this youth's perfections with an invisible and subtle stealth to creep in at mine eyes. well, let it be. what ho, malvolio!", "here, madam, at your service.", "run after that same peevish messenger, the county's man. he left this ring behind him, would i or not. tell him i'll none of it. olivia desire him not to flatter with his lord, nor hold him up with hopes. i am not for him. if that the youth will come this way tomorrow, i'll give him reasons for 't. hie thee, malvolio."], ["madam, i will.", "i do i know not what and fear to find mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind. fate, show thy force. ourselves we do not owe. what is decreed must be, and be this so."], ["will you stay no longer, nor will you not that i go with you?", "by your patience, no. my stars shine darkly over me. the malignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yours. therefore i shall crave of you your leave that i may bear my evils alone. it were a bad recompense for your love to lay any of them on you.", "let me yet know of you whither you are bound.", "no, sooth, sir. my determinate voyage is mere extravagancy. but i perceive in you so excellent a touch of modesty that you will not extort from me what i am willing to keep in. therefore it charges me in manners the rather to express myself. you must know of me then, antonio, my name is sebastian, which i called roderigo. my father was that sebastian of messaline, whom i know you have heard of. he left behind him myself and a sister, both born in an hour. if the heavens had been pleased, would we had so ended! but you, sir, altered that, for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea was my sister drowned.", "alas the day!"], ["a lady, sir, though it was said she much resembled me, was yet of many accounted beautiful. but though i could not with such estimable wonder overfar believe that, yet thus far i will boldly publish her: she bore a mind that envy could not but call fair. she is drowned already, sir, with salt water, though i seem to drown her remembrance again with more.", "pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.", "o good antonio, forgive me your trouble.", "if you will not murder me for my love, let me be your servant.", "if you will not undo what you have done that is, kill him whom you have recovered desire it not. fare you well at once. my bosom is full of kindness, and i am yet so near the manners of my mother, that upon the least occasion more mine eyes will tell tales of me. i am bound to the count orsino's court. farewell.", "the gentleness of all the gods go with thee! i have many enemies in orsino's court, else would i very shortly see thee there. but, come what may, i do adore thee so that danger shall seem sport, and i will go."], ["were not you even now with the countess olivia?", "even now, sir. on a moderate pace i have since arrived but hither.", "she returns this ring to you, sir. you might have saved me my pains to have taken it away yourself. she adds, moreover, that you should put your lord into a desperate assurance she will none of him. and one thing more, that you be never so hardy to come again in his affairs, unless it be to report your lord's taking of this. receive it so.", "she took the ring of me. i'll none of it.", "come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her, and her will is it should be so returned. if it be worth stooping for, there it lies in your eye. if not, be it his that finds it.", "i left no ring with her. what means this lady? fortune forbid my outside have not charmed her! she made good view of me, indeed so much that sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue, for she did speak in starts distractedly. she loves me, sure! the cunning of her passion invites me in this churlish messenger."], ["none of my lord's ring? why, he sent her none. i am the man. if it be so, as 'tis, poor lady, she were better love a dream. disguise, i see thou art a wickedness, wherein the pregnant enemy does much. how easy is it for the proper false in women's waxen hearts to set their forms! alas, our frailty is the cause, not we, for such as we are made of, such we be. how will this fadge? my master loves her dearly, and i, poor monster, fond as much on him, and she, mistaken, seems to dote on me. what will become of this? as i am man, my state is desperate for my master's love. as i am woman, now, alas the day, what thriftless sighs shall poor olivia breathe! o time, thou must untangle this, not i. it is too hard a knot for me to untie!"], ["approach, sir andrew. not to be abed after midnight is to be up betimes, and thou know'st,", "nay, my troth, i know not. but i know to be up late is to be up late.", "a false conclusion. i hate it as an unfilled can. to be up after midnight and to go to bed then, is early, so that to go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes. does not our life consist of the four elements?", "faith, so they say, but i think it rather consists of eating and drinking.", "thou'rt a scholar. let us therefore eat and drink. marian, i say! a stoup of wine!", "here comes the fool, i' faith.", "how now, my hearts! did you never see the picture of \"we three\"?", "welcome, ass. now let's have a catch."], ["by my troth, the fool has an excellent breast. i had rather than forty shillings i had such a leg, and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has. fool in sooth, thou wast in very gracious fooling last night when thou spokest of pigrogromitus, of the vapians passing the equinoctial of queubus. 'twas very good, i' faith. i sent thee sixpence for thy leman. hadst it?", "i did impeticos thy gratillity, for malvolio's nose is no whipstock. my lady has a white hand, and the myrmidons are no bottle-ale houses.", "excellent! why, this is the best fooling when all is done. now, a song.", "fool come on. there is sixpence for you. let's have a song.", "fool there's a testril of me too. if one knight give a", "would you have a love song or a song of good life?", "a love song, a love song.", "ay, ay. i care not for good life.", ""], ["excellent good, i' faith.", "good, good.", "", "a mellifluous voice, as i am true knight.", "a contagious breath.", "very sweet and contagious, i' faith.", "to hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. but shall we make the welkin dance indeed? shall we rouse the night owl in a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver? shall we do that?", "an you love me, let's do 't. i am dog at a catch.", "by 'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.", "most certain. let our catch be \"thou knave.\"", "\"hold thy peace, thou knave,\" knight? i shall be constrained in 't to call thee knave, knight."], ["'tis not the first time i have constrained one to call me \"knave.\" begin, fool. it begins \"hold thy peace.\"", "i shall never begin if i hold my peace.", "good, i' faith. come, begin.", "what a caterwauling do you keep here! if my lady have not called up her steward malvolio and bid him turn you out of doors, never trust me.", "my lady's a cataian. we are politicians, malvolio's a peg- a-ramsey, and (sings) three merry men be we. am not i consanguineous? am i not of her blood? tillyvally! \"lady\"! (", "beshrew me, the knight's in admirable fooling.", "ay, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do i too. he does it with a better grace, but i do it more natural.", "", "for the love o' god, peace!"], ["my masters, are you mad? or what are you? have you no wit, manners, nor honesty but to gabble like tinkers at this time of night? do you make an alehouse of my lady's house, that you squeak out your coziers' catches without any mitigation or remorse of voice? is there no respect of place, persons, nor time in you?", "we did keep time, sir, in our catches. sneck up!", "sir toby, i must be round with you. my lady bade me tell you, that, though she harbors you as her kinsman, she's nothing allied to your disorders. if you can separate yourself and your misdemeanors, you are welcome to the house. if not, an it would please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you farewell.", "", "nay, good sir toby.", "( )", "is 't even so?", "( )", "( )", "this is much credit to you."], ["", "", "", "", "out o' tune, sir. you lie. art any more than a steward? dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?", "yes, by saint anne, and ginger shall be hot i' the mouth too.", "thou'rt i' the right. go, sir, rub your chain with crumbs. a stoup of wine, maria!", "mistress mary, if you prized my lady's favor at anything more than contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil rule. she shall know of it, by this hand.", "go shake your ears!", "'twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's a-hungry, to challenge him the field and then to break promise with him and make a fool of him.", "do 't, knight. i'll write thee a challenge. or i'll deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth."], ["sweet sir toby, be patient for tonight. since the youth of the count's was today with thy lady, she is much out of quiet. for monsieur malvolio, let me alone with him. if i do not gull him into a nayword and make him a common recreation, do not think i have wit enough to lie straight in my bed. i know i can do it.", "possess us, possess us, tell us something of him.", "marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan.", "o, if i thought that, i'd beat him like a dog!", "what, for being a puritan? thy exquisite reason, dear knight?", "i have no exquisite reason for 't, but i have reason good enough.", "the devil a puritan that he is, or anything constantly, but a time-pleaser; an affectioned ass that cons state without book and utters it by great swarths; the best persuaded of himself, so crammed, as he thinks, with excellencies, that it is his grounds of faith that all that look on him love him. and on that vice in him will my revenge find notable cause to work.", "what wilt thou do?", "i will drop in his way some obscure epistles of love, wherein by the color of his beard, the shape of his leg, the manner of his gait, the expressure of his eye, forehead, and complexion,he shall find himself most feelingly personated."], ["i can write very like my lady your niece: on a forgotten matter we can hardly make distinction of our hands.", "excellent! i smell a device.", "i have 't in my nose too.", "he shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that they come from my niece, and that she's in love with him.", "my purpose is, indeed, a horse of that color.", "and your horse now would make him an ass.", "ass, i doubt not.", "oh, 'twill be admirable!", "sport royal, i warrant you. i know my physic will work with him. i will plant you two, and let the fool make a third, where he shall find the letter. observe his construction of it. for this night, to bed, and dream on the event. farewell.", "good night, penthesilea.", "before me, she's a good wench.", "she's a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me. what o' that?", "i was adored once too."], ["let's to bed, knight. thou hadst need send for more money.", "if i cannot recover your niece, i am a foul way out.", "send for money, knight. if thou hast her not i' the end, call me \"cut.\"", "if i do not, never trust me, take it how you will.", "come, come, i'll go burn some sack. 'tis too late to go to bed now. come, knight. come, knight."], ["give me some music. ( ) now, good morrow, friends. now, good cesario, but that piece of song, that old and antique song we heard last night. methought it did relieve my passion much, more than light airs and recollected terms of these most brisk and giddy-paced times: come, but one verse.", "he is not here, so please your lordship, that should sing it.", "who was it?", "feste, the jester, my lord, a fool that the lady olivia's father took much delight in. he is about the house.", "seek him out, and play the tune the while.", "( viola come hither, boy. if ever thou shalt love, in the sweet pangs of it remember me; for such as i am, all true lovers are, unstaid and skittish in all motions else save in the constant image of the creature that is beloved. how dost thou like this tune?", "it gives a very echo to the seat where love is throned."], ["thou dost speak masterly. my life upon 't, young though thou art, thine eye hath stay'd upon some favor that it loves. hath it not, boy?", "a little, by your favor.", "what kind of woman is't?", "of your complexion.", "she is not worth thee, then. what years, i' faith?", "about your years, my lord.", "too old by heaven. let still the woman take an elder than herself. so wears she to him, so sways she level in her husband's heart. for, boy, however we do praise ourselves, our fancies are more giddy and unfirm, more longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn, than women's are.", "i think it well, my lord.", "then let thy love be younger than thyself, or thy affection cannot hold the bent. for women are as roses, whose fair flower being once displayed, doth fall that very hour.", "and so they are. alas, that they are so, to die even when they to perfection grow!"], ["o, fellow, come, the song we had last night. mark it, cesario, it is old and plain; the spinsters and the knitters in the sun and the free maids that weave their thread with bones do use to chant it. it is silly sooth, and dallies with the innocence of love, like the old age.", "are you ready, sir?", "ay; prithee, sing.", "", "there's for thy pains."], ["no pains, sir. i take pleasure in singing, sir.", "i'll pay thy pleasure then.", "truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid, one time or another.", "give me now leave to leave thee.", "now, the melancholy god protect thee, and the tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta, for thy mind is a very opal. i would have men of such constancy put to sea, that their business might be everything and their intent everywhere, for that's it that always makes a good voyage of nothing. farewell.", "let all the rest give place.", "once more, cesario, get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty. tell her my love, more noble than the world, prizes not quantity of dirty lands; the parts that fortune hath bestowed upon her, tell her, i hold as giddily as fortune; but 'tis that miracle and queen of gems that nature pranks her in attracts my soul.", "but if she cannot love you, sir?"], ["i cannot be so answer'd.", "sooth, but you must. say that some lady, as perhaps there is, hath for your love a great a pang of heart as you have for olivia. you cannot love her. you tell her so. must she not then be answered?", "there is no woman's sides can bide the beating of so strong a passion as love doth give my heart. no woman's heart so big, to hold so much. they lack retention. alas, their love may be called appetite, no motion of the liver, but the palate, that suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt; but mine is all as hungry as the sea, and can digest as much. make no compare between that love a woman can bear me and that i owe olivia.", "ay, but i know", "what dost thou know?", "too well what love women to men may owe. in faith, they are as true of heart as we. my father had a daughter loved a man as it might be, perhaps, were i a woman, i should your lordship.", "and what's her history?"], ["a blank, my lord. she never told her love, but let concealment, like a worm i' the bud, feed on her damask cheek. she pined in thought, and with a green and yellow melancholy she sat like patience on a monument, smiling at grief. was not this love indeed? we men may say more, swear more, but indeed our shows are more than will, for still we prove much in our vows, but little in our love.", "but died thy sister of her love, my boy?", "i am all the daughters of my father's house, and all the brothers too and yet i know not. sir, shall i to this lady?", "ay, that's the theme. to her in haste. give her this jewel. say my love can give no place, bide no denay."], ["come thy ways, signior fabian.", "nay, i'll come. if i lose a scruple of this sport, let me be boiled to death with melancholy.", "wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally sheep-biter come by some notable shame?", "i would exult, man. you know, he brought me out o' favor with my lady about a bear-baiting here.", "to anger him, we'll have the bear again, and we will fool him black and blue. shall we not, sir andrew?", "an we do not, it is pity of our lives.", "here comes the little villain.", "how now, my metal of india?", "get you all three into the boxtree. malvolio's coming down this walk. he has been yonder i' the sun practising behavior to his own shadow this half hour. observe him, for the love of mockery, for i know this letter will make a contemplative idiot of him. close, in the name of jesting!"], ["lie thou there (throwing down a letter), for here comes the trout that must be caught with tickling.", "'tis but fortune, all is fortune. maria once told me she did affect me, and i have heard herself come thus near, that, should she fancy, it should be one of my complexion. besides, she uses me with a more exalted respect than anyone else that follows her. what should i think on 't?", "( ) here's an overweening rogue!", "o, peace! contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him. how he jets under his advanced plumes!", "( ) 'slight, i could so beat the rogue!", "( ) peace, i say.", "to be count malvolio!", "( ) ah, rogue!", "( ) pistol him, pistol him.", "( ) peace, peace!"], ["there is example for 't. the lady of the strachy married the yeoman of the wardrobe.", "( ) fie on him, jezebel!", "o, peace! now he's deeply in. look how imagination blows him.", "having been three months married to her, sitting in my state", "( ) oh, for a stone-bow, to hit him in the eye!", "calling my officers about me, in my branched velvet gown, having come from a daybed, where i have left olivia sleeping", "( ) fire and brimstone!", "( ) o, peace, peace!", "and then to have the humor of state, and after a demure travel of regard, telling them i know my place as i would they should do theirs, to ask for my kinsman toby", "( ) bolts and shackles!", "( ) o peace, peace, peace! now, now."], ["seven of my people, with an obedient start, make out for him. i frown the while, and perchance wind up watch, or play with my some rich jewel. toby approaches, curtsies there to me", "( ) shall this fellow live?", "though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.", "i extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar smile with an austere regard of control", "( ) and does not toby take you a blow o' the lips then?", "saying, \"cousin toby, my fortunes having cast me on your niece give me this prerogative of speech \"", "( ) what, what?", "\"you must amend your drunkenness.\"", "( ) out, scab!", "( ) nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.", "\"besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a foolish knight \"", "( ) that's me, i warrant you.", "\"one sir andrew \""], ["( ) i knew 'twas i, for many do call me fool.", "( ) what employment have we here?", "( ) now is the woodcock near the gin.", "o, peace! and the spirit of humors intimate reading aloud to him!", "(picking up the letter) by my life, this is my lady's hand these be her very c's, her u's and her t's and thus makes she her great p's. it is, in contempt of question, her hand.", "( ) her c's, her u's and her t's. why that?", "\"to the unknown beloved, this, and my good wishes\" her very phrases! by your leave, wax. soft! and the impressure her lucrece, with which she uses to seal. 'tis my lady. to whom should this be?", "( ) this wins him, liver and all.", "\"jove knows i love, but who? lips, do not move; no man must know.\""], ["\"no man must know.\" what follows? the numbers altered. \"no man must know.\" if this should be thee, malvolio?", "( ) marry, hang thee, brock!", "\"i may command where i adore, but silence, like a lucrece knife, with bloodless stroke my heart doth gore; m.o.a.i. doth sway my life.\"", "( ) a fustian riddle!", "( ) excellent wench, say i.", "\"m.o.a.i. doth sway my life.\" nay, but first, let me see, let me see, let me see.", "( ) what dish o' poison has she dressed him!", "( ) and with what wing the staniel checks at it!", "\"i may command where i adore.\" why, she may command me. i serve her, she is my lady. why, this is evident to any formal capacity. there is no obstruction in this. and the end what should that alphabetical position portend? if i could make that resemble something in me softly! m.o.a.i.", "( ) o, ay, make up that. he is now at a cold scent.", "sowter will cry upon 't for all this, though it be as rank as a fox."], ["\"m\" malvolio. \"m\" why, that begins my name.", "did not i say he would work it out? the cur is excellent at faults.", "\"m.\" but then there is no consonancy in the sequel that suffers under probation \"a\" should follow but \"o\" does.", "( ) and \"o\" shall end, i hope.", "( ) ay, or i'll cudgel him and make him cry \"o!\"", "and then \"i\" comes behind.", "ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see more detraction at your heels than fortunes before you.", "\"m.o.a.i.\" this simulation is not as the former, and yet to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for every one of these letters are in my name. soft, here follows prose.", "\"if this fall into thy hand, revolve. in my stars i am above thee, but be not afraid of greatness. some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em. thy fates open their hands. let thy blood and spirit embrace them. and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy humble slough and appear fresh. be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants."], ["let thy tongue tang arguments of state. put thyself into the trick of singularity. she thus advises thee that sighs for thee. remember who commended thy yellow stockings and wished to see thee ever cross-gartered. i say, remember. go to, thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so; if not, let me see thee a steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch fortune's fingers. farewell. she that would alter services with thee, the fortunate unhappy\"", "daylight and champaign discovers not more. this is open. i will be proud, i will read politic authors, i will baffle sir toby, i will wash off gross acquaintance, i will be point- devise the very man. i do not now fool myself, to let imagination jade me, for every reason excites to this, that my lady loves me. she did commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being cross-gartered, and in this she manifests herself to my love, and with a kind of injunction, drives me to these habits of her liking. i thank my stars i am happy. i will be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and cross-gartered, even with the swiftness of putting on. jove and my stars be praised! here is yet a postscript.", "\"thou canst not choose but know who i am. if thou entertainest my love, let it appear in thy smiling. thy smiles become thee well. therefore in my presence still smile, dear my sweet, i prithee.\""], ["jove, i thank thee! i will smile. i will do everything that thou wilt have me.", "i will not give my part of this sport for a pension of thousands to be paid from the sophy.", "i could marry this wench for this device.", "so could i too.", "and ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.", "nor i neither.", "here comes my noble gull-catcher.", "wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?", "or o' mine either?", "shall i play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy bondslave?", "i' faith, or i either?", "why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the image of it leaves him he must run mad."], ["nay, but say true, does it work upon him?", "like aqua vitae with a midwife.", "if you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his first approach before my lady. he will come to her in yellow stockings, and 'tis a color she abhors, and cross-gartered, a fashion she detests. and he will smile upon her, which will now be so unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a melancholy as she is, that it cannot but turn him into a notable contempt. if you will see it, follow me.", "to the gates of tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!", "i'll make one too."], ["save thee, friend, and thy music. dost thou live by thy tabour?", "no, sir, i live by the church.", "art thou a churchman?", "no such matter, sir. i do live by the church; for i do live at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.", "so thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar if a beggar dwell near him, or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy tabor stand by the church.", "you have said, sir. to see this age! a sentence is but a cheveril glove to a good wit. how quickly the wrong side may be turned outward!", "nay, that's certain. they that dally nicely with words may quickly make them wanton.", "i would therefore my sister had no name, sir.", "why, man?"], ["why, sir, her name's a word, and to dally with that word might make my sister wanton. but, indeed, words are very rascals since bonds disgraced them.", "thy reason, man?", "troth, sir, i can yield you none without words, and words are grown so false, i am loath to prove reason with them.", "i warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.", "not so, sir, i do care for something. but in my conscience, sir, i do not care for you. if that be to care for nothing, sir, i would it would make you invisible.", "art not thou the lady olivia's fool?", "no, indeed, sir; the lady olivia has no folly. she will keep no fool, sir, till she be married, and fools are as like husbands as pilchards are to herrings; the husband's the bigger: i am indeed not her fool, but her corrupter of words.", "i saw thee late at the count orsino's."], ["foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun. it shines everywhere. i would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be as oft with your master as with my mistress: i think i saw your wisdom there.", "nay, an thou pass upon me, i'll no more with thee. hold, there's expenses for thee.", "now jove, in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard!", "by my troth, i'll tell thee, i am almost sick for one, (aside) though i would not have it grow on my chin. (to fool) is thy lady within?", "would not a pair of these have bred, sir?", "yes, being kept together and put to use.", "i would play lord pandarus of phrygia, sir, to bring a cressida to this troilus.", "i understand you, sir. 'tis well begged.", "the matter, i hope, is not great, sir, begging but a beggar. cressida was a beggar. my lady is within, sir. i will construe to them whence you come. who you are and what you would are out of my welkin, i might say \"element,\" but the word is overworn."], ["this fellow is wise enough to play the fool, and to do that well craves a kind of wit. he must observe their mood on whom he jests, the quality of persons, and the time, and, like the haggard, check at every feather that comes before his eye. this is a practise as full of labor as a wise man's art, for folly that he wisely shows is fit. but wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.", "save you, gentleman.", "and you, sir.", "", "", "i hope, sir, you are, and i am yours.", "will you encounter the house? my niece is desirous you should enter, if your trade be to her.", "i am bound to your niece, sir. i mean, she is the list of my voyage.", "taste your legs, sir. put them to motion."], ["my legs do better understand me, sir, than i understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.", "i mean, to go, sir, to enter.", "i will answer you with gait and entrance. but we are prevented.", "most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain odors on you!", "( ) that youth's a rare courtier. \"rain odors.\" well.", "my matter hath no voice, lady, but to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed ear.", "\"odors,\" \"pregnant,\" and \"vouchsafed.\" i'll get 'em all three all ready.", "let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.", "give me your hand, sir.", "my duty, madam, and most humble service.", "what is your name?"], ["cesario is your servant's name, fair princess.", "my servant, sir! 'twas never merry world since lowly feigning was call'd compliment. you're servant to the count orsino, youth.", "and he is yours, and his must needs be yours: your servant's servant is your servant, madam.", "for him, i think not on him. for his thoughts, would they were blanks, rather than fill'd with me.", "madam, i come to whet your gentle thoughts on his behalf.", "o, by your leave, i pray you, i bade you never speak again of him. but, would you undertake another suit, i had rather hear you to solicit that than music from the spheres.", "dear lady", "give me leave, beseech you. i did send, after the last enchantment you did here, a ring in chase of you. so did i abuse myself, my servant, and, i fear me, you: under your hard construction must i sit, to force that on you, in a shameful cunning which you knew none of yours. what might you think?"], ["have you not set mine honor at the stake, and baited it with all the unmuzzled thoughts that tyrannous heart can think? to one of your receiving enough is shown. a cypress, not a bosom, hides my heart. so, let me hear you speak.", "i pity you.", "that's a degree to love.", "no, not a grize. for 'tis a vulgar proof that very oft we pity enemies.", "why then methinks 'tis time to smile again. o world, how apt the poor are to be proud! if one should be a prey, how much the better to fall before the lion than the wolf! ( ) the clock upbraids me with the waste of time. be not afraid, good youth, i will not have you. and yet when wit and youth is come to harvest, your wife is like to reap a proper man. there lies your way, due west.", "then westward ho! grace and good disposition attend your ladyship! you'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?", "stay, i prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.", "that you do think you are not what you are.", "if i think so, i think the same of you.", "then think you right: i am not what i am.", "i would you were as i would have you be!"], ["would it be better, madam, than i am? i wish it might, for now i am your fool.", "oh, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful in the contempt and anger of his lip! a murderous guilt shows not itself more soon than love that would seem hid. love's night is noon. viola) cesario, by the roses of the spring, by maidhood, honor, truth, and everything, i love thee so, that, maugre all thy pride, nor wit nor reason can my passion hide. do not extort thy reasons from this clause, for that i woo, thou therefore hast no cause, but rather reason thus with reason fetter. love sought is good, but given unsought better.", "by innocence i swear, and by my youth i have one heart, one bosom, and one truth, and that no woman has, nor never none shall mistress be of it, save i alone. and so adieu, good madam. nevermore will i my master's tears to you deplore.", "yet come again, for thou perhaps mayst move that heart, which now abhors, to like his love."], ["no, faith, i'll not stay a jot longer.", "thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.", "you must needs yield your reason, sir andrew.", "marry, i saw your niece do more favors to the count's servingman than ever she bestowed upon me. i saw 't i' the orchard.", "did she see thee the while, old boy? tell me that.", "as plain as i see you now.", "this was a great argument of love in her toward you.", "'slight, will you make an ass o' me?", "i will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgment and reason.", "and they have been grand-jurymen since before noah was a sailor.", "she did show favor to the youth in your sight only to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valor, to put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver. you should then have accosted her, and with some excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should have banged the youth into dumbness."], ["this was looked for at your hand, and this was balked. the double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash off, and you are now sailed into the north of my lady's opinion, where you will hang like an icicle on a dutchman's beard, unless you do redeem it by some laudable attempt either of valor or policy.", "an 't be any way, it must be with valor, for policy i hate. i had as lief be a brownist as a politician.", "why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valor. challenge me the count's youth to fight with him. hurt him in eleven places. my niece shall take note of it, and assure thyself, there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in man's commendation with woman than report of valor.", "there is no way but this, sir andrew.", "will either of you bear me a challenge to him?", "go, write it in a martial hand. be curst and brief. it is no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and full of invention. taunt him with the license of ink. if thou \"thou\"-est him some thrice, it shall not be amiss; and as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of paper, although the sheet were big enough for the bed of ware in england, set 'em down. go, about it. let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou write with a goose-pen, no matter. about it.", "where shall i find you?"], ["we'll call thee at the cubiculo. go.", "this is a dear manikin to you, sir toby.", "i have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand strong, or so.", "we shall have a rare letter from him: but you'll not deliver 't?", "never trust me, then. and by all means stir on the youth to an answer. i think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them together. for andrew, if he were opened and you find so much blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, i'll eat the rest of the anatomy.", "and his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty.", "look where the youngest wren of nine comes.", "if you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself into stitches, follow me. yond gull malvolio is turned heathen, a very renegado. for there is no christian that means to be saved by believing rightly can ever believe such impossible passages of grossness. he's in yellow stockings."], ["and cross-gartered?", "most villanously, like a pedant that keeps a school i' the church. i have dogged him, like his murderer. he does obey every point of the letter that i dropped to betray him. he does smile his face into more lines than is in the new map with the augmentation of the indies. you have not seen such a thing as 'tis. i can hardly forbear hurling things at him. i know my lady will strike him. if she do, he'll smile and take 't for a great favor.", "come, bring us, bring us where he is."], ["i would not by my will have troubled you, but, since you make your pleasure of your pains, i will no further chide you.", "i could not stay behind you. my desire, more sharp than fild steel, did spur me forth. and not all love to see you, though so much as might have drawn one to a longer voyage, but jealousy what might befall your travel, being skilless in these parts, which to a stranger, unguided and unfriended, often prove rough and unhospitable. my willing love, the rather by these arguments of fear, set forth in your pursuit.", "my kind antonio, i can no other answer make but thanks, and thanks, and ever thanks. and oft good turns are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay. but were my worth as is my conscience, firm, you should find better dealing. what's to do? shall we go see the relics of this town?", "tomorrow, sir. best first go see your lodging.", "i am not weary, and 'tis long to night: i pray you, let us satisfy our eyes with the memorials and the things of fame that do renown this city."], ["would you'd pardon me; i do not without danger walk these streets: once in a sea-fight 'gainst the count his galleys i did some service, of such note indeed, that were i ta'en here it would scarce be answered.", "belike you slew great number of his people?", "the offence is not of such a bloody nature; albeit the quality of the time and quarrel might well have given us bloody argument. it might have since been answered in repaying what we took from them, which, for traffic's sake, most of our city did. only myself stood out; for which, if i be lapsd in this place, i shall pay dear.", "do not then walk too open.", "it doth not fit me. hold, sir, here's my purse. in the south suburbs, at the elephant, is best to lodge. i will bespeak our diet, whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge with viewing of the town. there shall you have me.", "why i your purse?", "haply your eye shall light upon some toy you have desire to purchase, and your store, i think, is not for idle markets, sir.", "i'll be your purse-bearer and leave you for an hour."], ["to the elephant.", "i do remember."], ["i have sent after him. he says he'll come. how shall i feast him? what bestow of him? for youth is bought more oft than begged or borrow'd. i speak too loud. where's malvolio? he is sad and civil and suits well for a servant with my fortunes. where is malvolio?", "he's coming, madam; but in very strange manner. he is sure possessed, madam.", "why, what's the matter? does he rave?", "no, madam, he does nothing but smile. your ladyship were best to have some guard about you if he come, for sure the man is tainted in 's wits.", "go call him hither.", "i am as mad as he, if sad and merry madness equal be.", "how now, malvolio?", "sweet lady, ho, ho."], ["smilest thou? i sent for thee upon a sad occasion.", "sad, lady! i could be sad. this does make some obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering, but what of that? if it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true sonnet is, \"please one, and please all.\"", "why, how dost thou, man? what is the matter with thee?", "not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs. it did come to his hands, and commands shall be executed. i think we do know the sweet roman hand.", "wilt thou go to bed, malvolio?", "to bed? \"ay, sweetheart, and i'll come to thee.\"", "god comfort thee! why dost thou smile so, and kiss thy hand so oft?", "how do you, malvolio?", "at your request! yes, nightingales answer daws!", "why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?", "\"be not afraid of greatness.\" 'twas well writ.", "what meanest thou by that, malvolio?", "\"some are born great \""], ["ha?", "\"some achieve greatness \"", "what sayest thou?", "\"and some have greatness thrust upon them.\"", "heaven restore thee!", "\"remember who commended thy yellow stockings \"", "thy yellow stockings?", "\"and wished to see thee cross-gartered.\"", "cross-gartered?", "\"go to, thou art made, if thou desirest to be so \"", "am i made?", "\"if not, let me see thee a servant still.\"", "why, this is very midsummer madness.", "madam, the young gentleman of the count orsino's is returned. i could hardly entreat him back. he attends your ladyship's pleasure."], ["i'll come to him.", "good maria, let this fellow be looked to. where's my cousin toby? let some of my people have a special care of him. i would not have him miscarry for the half of my dowry.", "oh, ho! do you come near me now? no worse man than sir toby to look to me. this concurs directly with the letter. she sends him on purpose that i may appear stubborn to him, for she incites me to that in the letter. \"cast thy humble slough,\" says she. \"be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants. let thy tongue tang with arguments of state. put thyself into the trick of singularity,\" and consequently sets down the manner how: as, a sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of some sir of note, and so forth. i have limed her, but it is jove's doing, and jove make me thankful! and when she went away now, \"let this fellow be looked to.\" \"fellow!\" not \"malvolio,\" nor after my degree, but \"fellow.\" why, everything adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no incredulous or unsafe circumstance what can be said? nothing that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my hopes. well, jove, not i, is the doer of this, and he is to be thanked."], ["which way is he, in the name of sanctity? if all the devils of hell be drawn in little, and legion himself possessed him, yet i'll speak to him.", "here he is, here he is. how is't with you, sir? how is't with you, man?", "go off, i discard you. let me enjoy my private. go off.", "sir toby belch lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! did not i tell you? sir toby, my lady prays you to have a care of him.", "aha! does she so?", "fabian maria go to, go to! peace, peace. we must deal gently with him. let me alone. how do you, malvolio? how is 't with you? what, man, defy the devil! consider, he's an enemy to mankind.", "do you know what you say?", "sir toby belch la you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at heart! pray god, he be not bewitched!", "carry his water to the wisewoman.", "marry, and it shall be done tomorrow morning if i live. my lady would not lose him for more than i'll say.", "how now, mistress?"], ["o lord!", "maria prithee, hold thy peace. this is not the way. do you not see you move him? let me alone with him.", "no way but gentleness, gently, gently. the fiend is rough and will not be roughly used.", "malvolio why, how now, my bawcock! how dost thou, chuck?", "sir!", "ay, biddy, come with me. what, man! 'tis not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with satan. hang him, foul collier!", "get him to say his prayers, good sir toby, get him to pray.", "my prayers, minx?", "sir toby belch no, i warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.", "go, hang yourselves all! you are idle, shallow things. i am not of your element. you shall know more hereafter."], ["is 't possible?", "if this were played upon a stage now, i could condemn it as an improbable fiction.", "his very genius hath taken the infection of the device, man.", "nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.", "why, we shall make him mad indeed.", "the house will be the quieter.", "come, we'll have him in a dark room and bound. my niece is already in the belief that he's mad. we may carry it thus, for our pleasure and his penance, till our very pastime, tired out of breath, prompt us to have mercy on him, at which time we will bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of madmen. but see, but see!", "more matter for a may morning.", "here's the challenge, read it. warrant there's vinegar and pepper in 't.", "is 't so saucy?", "ay, is 't, i warrant him. do but read."], ["give me. \"youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.\"", "good, and valiant.", "\"wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind, why i do call thee so, for i will show thee no reason for 't.\"", "a good note, that keeps you from the blow of the law.", "\"thou comest to the lady olivia, and in my sight she uses thee kindly. but thou liest in thy throat. that is not the matter i challenge thee for.\"", "very brief, and to exceeding good sense less.", "\"i will waylay thee going home, where if it be thy chance to kill me \"", "good.", "\"thou killest me like a rogue and a villain.\"", "still you keep o' the windy side of the law. good.", "\"fare thee well, and god have mercy upon one of our souls. he may have mercy upon mine, but my hope is better, and so look to thyself. thy friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn enemy, andrew aguecheek\""], ["if this letter move him not, his legs cannot. i'll give 't him.", "you may have very fit occasion for 't. he is now in some commerce with my lady and will by and by depart.", "go, sir andrew. scout me for him at the corner the orchard like a bum-baily. so soon as ever thou seest him, draw, and as thou drawest, swear horrible, for it comes to pass oft that a terrible oath, with a swaggering accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would have earned him. away!", "nay, let me alone for swearing.", "now will not i deliver his letter, for the behavior of the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacity and breeding. his employment between his lord and my niece confirms no less. therefore this letter, being so excellently ignorant, will breed no terror in the youth. he will find it comes from a clodpole. but, sir, i will deliver his challenge by word of mouth, set upon aguecheek a notable report of valor, and drive the gentleman (as i know his youth will aptly receive it) into a most hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity. this will so fright them both that they will kill one another by the look, like cockatrices."], ["here he comes with your niece. give them way till he take leave, and presently after him.", "i will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a challenge.", "i have said too much unto a heart of stone and laid mine honor too unchary on 't. there's something in me that reproves my fault, but such a headstrong potent fault it is that it but mocks reproof.", "with the same 'havior that your passion bears goes on my master's grief.", "here, wear this jewel for me. 'tis my picture. refuse it not. it hath no tongue to vex you. and i beseech you come again tomorrow. what shall you ask of me that i'll deny, that honor, saved, may upon asking give?", "nothing but this: your true love for my master.", "how with mine honor may i give him that which i have given to you?", "i will acquit you.", "well, come again tomorrow. fare thee well. a fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell."], ["gentleman, god save thee.", "and you, sir.", "that defense thou hast, betake thee to 't. of what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, i know not, but thy intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, attends thee at the orchard end. dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skillful and deadly.", "you mistake, sir. i am sure no man hath any quarrel to me. my remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offense done to any man.", "you'll find it otherwise, i assure you. therefore, if you hold your life at any price, betake you to your guard, for your opposite hath in him what youth, strength, skill, and wrath can furnish man withal.", "i pray you, sir, what is he?", "he is knight, dubbed with unhatched rapier and on carpet consideration, but he is a devil in private brawl. souls and bodies hath he divorced three, and his incensement at this moment is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death and sepulchre. hob, nob, is his word. \"give 't or take 't.\""], ["i will return again into the house and desire some conduct of the lady. i am no fighter. i have heard of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on others, to taste their valor. belike this is a man of that quirk.", "sir, no. his indignation derives itself out of a very competent injury. therefore get you on and give him his desire. back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with me which with as much safety you might answer him. therefore on, or strip your sword stark naked, for meddle you must, that's certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.", "this is as uncivil as strange. i beseech you, do me this courteous office, as to know of the knight what my offense to him is. it is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.", "i will do so. signior fabian, stay you by this gentleman till my return.", "pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?", "i know the knight is incensed against you, even to a mortal arbitrament, but nothing of the circumstance more.", "i beseech you, what manner of man is he?", "nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by his form, as you are like to find him in the proof of his valor. he is, indeed, sir, the most skillful, bloody, and fatal opposite that you could possibly have found in any part of illyria. will you walk towards him? i will make your peace with him if i can."], ["i shall be much bound to you for 't. i am one that had rather go with sir priest than sir knight. i care not who knows so much of my mettle.", "why, man, he's a very devil. i have not seen such a firago. i had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and all, and he gives me the stuck-in with such a mortal motion, that it is inevitable. and on the answer, he pays you as surely as your feet hit the ground they step on. they say he has been fencer to the sophy.", "pox on 't! i'll not meddle with him.", "ay, but he will not now be pacified. fabian can scarce hold him yonder.", "plague on 't, an i thought he had been valiant and so cunning in fence, i'd have seen him damned ere i'd have challenged him. let him let the matter slip, and i'll give him my horse, gray capilet.", "i'll make the motion. stand here, make a good show on 't. this shall end without the perdition of souls. marry, i'll ride your horse as well as i ride you."], ["fabian i have his horse to take up the quarrel. i have persuaded him the youth's a devil.", "he is as horribly conceited of him, and pants and looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.", "viola there's no remedy, sir; he will fight with you for 's oath sake. marry, he hath better bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of. therefore, draw for the supportance of his vow. he protests he will not hurt you.", "pray god defend me! a little thing would make me tell them how much i lack of a man.", "give ground, if you see him furious.", "come, sir andrew, there's no remedy. the gentleman will, for his honor's sake, have one bout with you. he cannot by the duello avoid it. but he has promised me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, he will not hurt you. come on, to 't.", "pray god, he keep his oath!", "i do assure you, 'tis against my will.", "put up your sword. if this young gentleman have done offence, i take the fault on me. if you offend him, i for him defy you."], ["you, sir? why, what are you?", "one, sir, that for his love dares yet do more than you have heard him brag to you he will.", "nay, if you be an undertaker, i am for you.", "o good sir toby, hold! here come the officers.", "antonio i'll be with you anon.", "andrew pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.", "marry, will i, sir. and for that i promised you, i'll be as good as my word. he will bear you easily and reins well.", "this is the man. do thy office.", "antonio, i arrest thee at the suit of count orsino.", "you do mistake me, sir.", "no, sir, no jot. i know your favor well, though now you have no sea-cap on your head. take him away. he knows i know him well.", "i must obey. viola this comes with seeking you: but there's no remedy. i shall answer it."], ["what will you do, now my necessity makes me to ask you for my purse? it grieves me much more for what i cannot do for you than what befalls myself. you stand amazed, but be of comfort.", "come, sir, away.", "viola i must entreat of you some of that money.", "what money, sir? for the fair kindness you have showed me here, and part being prompted by your present trouble, out of my lean and low ability i'll lend you something. my having is not much. i'll make division of my present with you. hold, there's half my coffer.", "will you deny me now? is 't possible that my deserts to you can lack persuasion? do not tempt my misery, lest that it make me so unsound a man as to upbraid you with those kindnesses that i have done for you.", "i know of none, nor know i you by voice or any feature. i hate ingratitude more in a man than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness, or any taint of vice whose strong corruption inhabits our frail blood", "o heavens themselves!", "come, sir, i pray you, go."], ["let me speak a little. this youth that you see here i snatched one half out of the jaws of death, relieved him with such sanctity of love, and to his image, which methought did promise most venerable worth, did i devotion.", "what's that to us? the time goes by. away!", "but oh, how vile an idol proves this god! thou hast, sebastian, done good feature shame. in nature there's no blemish but the mind. none can be called deformed but the unkind. virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil are empty trunks o'erflourished by the devil.", "the man grows mad. away with him. come, come, sir.", "lead me on.", "methinks his words do from such passion fly, that he believes himself. so do not i. prove true, imagination, oh, prove true, that i, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!", "come hither, knight. come hither, fabian. we'll whisper o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.", "he named sebastian. i my brother know yet living in my glass. even such and so in favor was my brother, and he went"], ["still in this fashion, color, ornament, for him i imitate. oh, if it prove, tempests are kind and salt waves fresh in love!", "a very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than a hare. his dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in necessity and denying him. and for his cowardship, ask fabian.", "a coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.", "'slid, i'll after him again and beat him.", "do, cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.", "an i do not", "come, let's see the event.", "i dare lay any money 'twill be nothing yet."], ["will you make me believe that i am not sent for you?", "go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow. let me be clear of thee.", "well held out, i' faith. no, i do not know you, nor i am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come speak with her, nor your name is not master cesario, nor this is not my nose neither. nothing that is so is so.", "i prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else. thou know'st not me.", "vent my folly? he has heard that word of some great man and now applies it to a fool. vent my folly! i am afraid this great lubber, the world, will prove a cockney. i prithee now, ungird thy strangeness and tell me what i shall vent to my lady. shall i vent to her that thou art coming?", "i prithee, foolish greek, depart from me. there's money for thee. if you tarry longer, i shall give worse payment.", "by my troth, thou hast an open hand. these wise men that give fools money get themselves a good report after fourteen years' purchase."], ["sebastian now, sir, have i met you again? there's for you.", "why, there's for thee, and there, and there. are all the people mad?", "hold, sir, or i'll throw your dagger o'er the house.", "this will i tell my lady straight. i would not be in some of your coats for two pence.", "( sebastian) come on, sir, hold!", "nay, let him alone. i'll go another way to work with him. i'll have an action of battery against him if there be any law in illyria. though i struck him first, yet it's no matter for that.", "sir toby belch let go thy hand.", "come, sir, i will not let you go. come, my young soldier, put up your iron. you are well fleshed. come on.", "i will be free from thee."], ["what wouldst thou now? if thou darest tempt me further, draw thy sword.", "what, what? nay, then i must have an ounce or two of this malapert blood from you.", "hold, toby! on thy life i charge thee, hold!", "madam!", "will it be ever thus? ungracious wretch, fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves, where manners ne'er were preach'd! out of my sight! be not offended, dear cesario. rudesby, be gone!", "i prithee, gentle friend, let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway in this uncivil and unjust extent against thy peace. go with me to my house, and hear thou there how many fruitless pranks this ruffian hath botched up, that thou thereby mayst smile at this. thou shalt not choose but go. do not deny. beshrew his soul for me! he started one poor heart of mine in thee.", "( ) what relish is in this? how runs the stream? or i am mad, or else this is a dream. let fancy still my sense in lethe steep."], ["if it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!", "nay, come, i prithee. would thou'dst be ruled by me!", "madam, i will.", "oh, say so, and so be!"], ["nay, i prithee, put on this gown and this beard. make him believe thou art sir topas the curate. do it quickly. i'll call sir toby the whilst.", "well, i'll put it on, and i will dissemble myself in 't, and i would i were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown.", "i am not tall enough to become the function well, nor lean enough to be thought a good student, but to be said an honest man and a good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a careful man and a great scholar. the competitors enter.", "jove bless thee, master parson.", "bonos dies, sir toby. for, as the old hermit of prague, that never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a niece of king gorboduc, \"that that is is.\" so i, being master parson, am master parson. for, what is \"that\" but \"that,\" and \"is\" but \"is\"?", "to him, sir topas."], ["( ) what ho, i say! peace in this prison!", "the knave counterfeits well. a good knave.", "( ) who calls there?", "sir topas the curate, who comes to visit malvolio the lunatic.", "sir topas, sir topas, good sir topas, go to my lady", "out, hyperbolical fiend! how vexest thou this man! talkest thou nothing but of ladies?", "( ) well said, master parson.", "sir topas, never was man thus wronged. good sir topas, do not think i am mad. they have laid me here in hideous darkness.", "fie, thou dishonest satan! i call thee by the most modest terms, for i am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil himself with courtesy. sayest thou that house is dark?", "as hell, sir topas.", "why, it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes, and the clerestories toward the south-north are as lustrous as ebony. and yet complainest thou of obstruction?", "i am not mad, sir topas. i say to you this house is dark."], ["madman, thou errest. i say, there is no darkness but ignorance, in which thou art more puzzled than the egyptians in their fog.", "i say, this house is as dark as ignorance, though ignorance were as dark as hell. and i say, there was never man thus abused. i am no more mad than you are. make the trial of it in any constant question.", "what is the opinion of pythagoras concerning wildfowl?", "that the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.", "what thinkest thou of his opinion?", "i think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.", "fare thee well. remain thou still in darkness. thou shalt hold the opinion of pythagoras ere i will allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. fare thee well.", "sir topas, sir topas!", "my most exquisite sir topas!", "nay, i am for all waters.", "thou mightst have done this without thy beard and gown. he sees thee not."], ["to him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou findest him. i would we were well rid of this knavery. if he may be conveniently delivered, i would he were, for i am now so far in offense with my niece that i cannot pursue with any safety this sport to the upshot. come by and by to my chamber.", "", "fool!", "", "fool!", "", "fool, i say!", "", "good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink, and paper. as i am a gentleman, i will live to be thankful to thee for 't.", "master malvolio?", "ay, good fool."], ["alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?", "fool, there was never a man so notoriously abused: i am as well in my wits, fool, as thou art.", "but as well? then you are mad indeed, if you be no better in your wits than a fool.", "they have here propertied me, keep me in darkness, send ministers to me asses! and do all they can to face me out of my wits.", "advise you what you say. the minister is here. malvolio, malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore! endeavor thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble-babble.", "sir topas!", "maintain no words with him, good fellow. who, i, sir? not i, sir. god b' wi' you, good sir topas. marry, amen. i will, sir, i will.", "fool, fool, fool, i say!", "alas, sir, be patient. what say you sir? i am shent for speaking to you.", "good fool, help me to some light and some paper. i tell thee, i am as well in my wits as any man in illyria.", "well-a-day that you were, sir."], ["by this hand, i am. good fool, some ink, paper, and light, and convey what i will set down to my lady. it shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did.", "i will help you to 't. but tell me true, are you not mad indeed? or do you but counterfeit?", "believe me, i am not. i tell thee true.", "nay, i'll ne'er believe a madman till i see his brains. i will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.", "fool, i'll requite it in the highest degree. i prithee, be gone.", ""], ["this is the air, that is the glorious sun. this pearl she gave me, i do feel 't and see 't, and though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus, yet 'tis not madness. where's antonio, then? i could not find him at the elephant. yet there he was, and there i found this credit, that he did range the town to seek me out. his counsel now might do me golden service. for though my soul disputes well with my sense that this may be some error, but no madness, yet doth this accident and flood of fortune so far exceed all instance, all discourse, that i am ready to distrust mine eyes and wrangle with my reason that persuades me to any other trust but that i am mad or else the lady's mad. yet if 'twere so, she could not sway her house, command her followers, take and give back affairs and their dispatch with such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing as i perceive she does. there's something in 't that is deceivable. but here the lady comes."], ["sebastian blame not this haste of mine. if you mean well, now go with me and with this holy man into the chantry by. there, before him and underneath that consecrated roof, plight me the full assurance of your faith, that my most jealous and too doubtful soul may live at peace. he shall conceal it whiles you are willing it shall come to note, what time we will our celebration keep according to my birth. what do you say?", "i'll follow this good man, and go with you; and, having sworn truth, ever will be true.", "then lead the way, good father; and heavens so shine that they may fairly note this act of mine."], ["now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.", "good master fabian, grant me another request.", "anything.", "do not desire to see this letter.", "this is, to give a dog and in recompense desire my dog again.", "belong you to the lady olivia, friends?", "ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.", "i know thee well. how dost thou, my good fellow?", "truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for my friends.", "just the contrary. the better for thy friends.", "no, sir, the worse.", "how can that be?"], ["marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me, now my foes tell me plainly i am an ass. so that by my foes, sir i profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my friends, i am abused. so that, conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives make your two affirmatives, why then the worse for my friends and the better for my foes.", "why, this is excellent.", "by my troth, sir, no though it please you to be one of my friends.", "thou shalt not be the worse for me: there's gold.", "but that it would be double-dealing, sir, i would you could make it another.", "o, you give me ill counsel.", "put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once, and let your flesh and blood obey it.", "well, i will be so much a sinner, to be a double-dealer. there's another. ( )", "primo, secundo, tertio is a good play, and the old saying is, the third pays for all. the triplex, sir, is a good tripping measure, or the bells of saint bennet, sir, may put you in mind one, two, three."], ["you can fool no more money out of me at this throw. if you will let your lady know i am here to speak with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.", "marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till i come again. i go, sir, but i would not have you to think that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness. but, as you say, sir, let your bounty take a nap, i will awake it anon.", "here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.", "that face of his i do remember well. yet, when i saw it last, it was besmeared as black as vulcan in the smoke of war. a baubling vessel was he captain of, for shallow draught and bulk unprizable, with which such scathful grapple did he make with the most noble bottom of our fleet, that very envy and the tongue of loss cried fame and honor on him. what's the matter?", "orsino, this is that antonio that took the and her fraught from candy, and this is he that did the board when your young nephew titus lost his leg. here in the streets, desperate of shame and state, in private brabble did we apprehend him."], ["he did me kindness, sir, drew on my side, but in conclusion put strange speech upon me. i know not what 'twas but distraction.", "notable pirate! thou saltwater thief, what foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies, whom thou, in terms so bloody and so dear, hast made thine enemies?", "orsino, noble sir, be pleased that i shake off these names you give me. antonio never yet was thief or pirate, though, i confess, on base and ground enough, orsino's enemy. a witchcraft drew me hither. that most ingrateful boy there by your side from the rude sea's enraged and foamy mouth did i redeem. a wreck past hope he was. his life i gave him and did thereto add my love, without retention or restraint, all his in dedication. for his sake did i expose myself, pure for his love, into the danger of this adverse town, drew to defend him when he was beset, where being apprehended, his false cunning, (not meaning to partake with me in danger) taught him to face me out of his acquaintance, and grew a twenty-years-removed thing while one would wink, denied me mine own purse, which i had recommended to his use not half an hour before.", "how can this be?", "antonio when came he to this town?"], ["today, my lord, and for three months before, no interim, not a minute's vacancy, both day and night did we keep company.", "here comes the countess. now heaven walks on earth. but for thee, fellow. fellow, thy words are madness: three months this youth hath tended upon me; but more of that anon. take him aside.", "what would my lord, but that he may not have, wherein olivia may seem serviceable? cesario, you do not keep promise with me.", "madam?", "gracious olivia", "what do you say, cesario? good my lord", "my lord would speak. my duty hushes me.", "if it be aught to the old tune, my lord, it is as fat and fulsome to mine ear as howling after music.", "still so cruel?", "still so constant, lord."], ["what, to perverseness? you, uncivil lady, to whose ingrate and unauspicious altars my soul the faithfull'st off'rings have breathed out that e'er devotion tendered what shall i do?", "even what it please my lord that shall become him.", "why should i not, had i the heart to do it, like to the egyptian thief at point of death, kill what i love? a savage jealousy that sometimes savors nobly. but hear me this: since you to nonregardance cast my faith, and that i partly know the instrument that screws me from my true place in your favor, live you the marble-breasted tyrant still. but this your minion, whom i know you love, and whom, by heaven i swear, i tender dearly, him will i tear out of that cruel eye where he sits crowned in his master's spite. come, boy, with me. my thoughts are ripe in mischief: i'll sacrifice the lamb that i do love to spite a raven's heart within a dove.", "and i, most jocund, apt, and willingly, to do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.", "where goes cesario?", "after him i love more than i love these eyes, more than my life, more, by all mores, than e'er i shall love wife. if i do feign, you witnesses above, punish my life for tainting of my love!"], ["ay me, detested! how am i beguiled!", "who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?", "hast thou forgot thyself? is it so long? call forth the holy father.", "viola come, away!", "whither, my lord? cesario, husband, stay.", "husband?", "ay, husband. can he that deny?", "her husband, sirrah?", "no, my lord, not i.", "alas, it is the baseness of thy fear that makes thee strangle thy propriety. fear not, cesario. take thy fortunes up. be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art as great as that thou fear'st.", "o, welcome, father! father, i charge thee, by thy reverence, here to unfold (though lately we intended to keep in darkness what occasion now reveals before 'tis ripe) what thou dost know hath newly passed between this youth and me."], ["a contract of eternal bond of love, confirmed by mutual joinder of your hands, attested by the holy close of lips, strengthened by interchangement of your rings, and all the ceremony of this compact sealed in my function, by my testimony, since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave i have traveled but two hours.", "o thou dissembling cub! what wilt thou be when time hath sowed a grizzle on thy case? or will not else thy craft so quickly grow that thine own trip shall be thine overthrow? farewell, and take her; but direct thy feet where thou and i henceforth may never meet.", "my lord, i do protest", "o, do not swear! hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.", "for the love of god, a surgeon! send one presently to sir toby.", "what's the matter?", "he has broke my head across and has given sir toby a bloody coxcomb too. for the love of god, your help! i had rather than forty pound i were at home.", "who has done this, sir andrew?"], ["the count's gentleman, one cesario. we took him for a coward, but he's the very devil incardinate.", "my gentleman, cesario?", "'od's lifelings, here he is! you broke my head for nothing, and that that i did, i was set on to do 't by sir toby.", "why do you speak to me? i never hurt you. you drew your sword upon me without cause, but i bespoke you fair and hurt you not.", "if a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me. i think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb.", "here comes sir toby halting. you shall hear more. but if he had not been in drink, he would have tickled you othergates than he did.", "how now, gentleman? how is 't with you?", "that's all one: has hurt me, and there's the end on 't. fool sot, didst see dick surgeon, sot?", "oh, he's drunk, sir toby, an hour agone. his eyes were set at eight i' the morning.", "then he's a rogue, and a passy-measures pavin. i hate a drunken rogue."], ["away with him! who hath made this havoc with them?", "i'll help you, sir toby, because we'll be dressed together.", "will you help? an ass-head, and a coxcomb, and a knave, a thin-faced knave, a gull!", "get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked to.", "i am sorry, madam, i have hurt your kinsman, but, had it been the brother of my blood, i must have done no less with wit and safety. you throw a strange regard upon me, and by that i do perceive it hath offended you. pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows we made each other but so late ago.", "one face, one voice, one habit, and two persons! a natural perspective, that is and is not!", "antonio, o my dear antonio! how have the hours racked and tortured me since i have lost thee!", "sebastian are you?", "fear'st thou that, antonio?"], ["how have you made division of yourself? an apple, cleft in two, is not more twin than these two creatures. which is sebastian?", "most wonderful!", "viola do i stand there? i never had a brother; nor can there be that deity in my nature, of here and everywhere. i had a sister, whom the blind waves and surges have devoured. of charity, what kin are you to me? what countryman? what name? what parentage?", "of messaline. sebastian was my father; such a sebastian was my brother too, so went he suited to his watery tomb. if spirits can assume both form and suit you come to fright us.", "a spirit i am indeed, but am in that dimension grossly clad which from the womb i did participate. were you a woman, as the rest goes even, i should my tears let fall upon your cheek and say \"thrice-welcome, drownd viola!\"", "my father had a mole upon his brow.", "and so had mine.", "and died that day when viola from her birth had numbered thirteen years."], ["oh, that record is lively in my soul! he finished indeed his mortal act that day that made my sister thirteen years.", "if nothing lets to make us happy both but this my masculine usurped attire, do not embrace me till each circumstance of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump that i am viola. which to confirm, i'll bring you to a captain in this town, where lie my maiden weeds, by whose gentle help i was preserved to serve this noble count. all the occurrence of my fortune since hath been between this lady and this lord.", "olivia so comes it, lady, you have been mistook. but nature to her bias drew in that. you would have been contracted to a maid; nor are you therein, by my life, deceived. you are betrothed both to a maid and man.", "olivia be not amazed. right noble is his blood. if this be so, as yet the glass seems true, i shall have share in this most happy wreck. viola boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times thou never shouldst love woman like to me.", "and all those sayings will i overswear; and those swearings keep as true in soul as doth that orbd continent the fire that severs day from night.", "give me thy hand, and let me see thee in thy woman's weeds."], ["the captain that did bring me first on shore hath my maid's garments. he, upon some action, is now in durance at malvolio's suit, a gentleman and follower of my lady's.", "he shall enlarge him.", "fetch malvolio hither: and yet, alas, now i remember me, they say, poor gentleman, he's much distract. a most extracting frenzy of mine own from my remembrance clearly banished his. fool how does he, sirrah?", "truly, madam, he holds beelzebub at the staves' end as well as a man in his case may do. has here writ a letter to you. i should have given 't you today morning, but as a madman's epistles are no gospels, so it skills not much when they are delivered.", "open 't, and read it.", "look then to be well edified when the fool delivers the madman. \"by the lord, madam,\"", "how now? art thou mad?", "no, madam, i do but read madness. an your ladyship will have it as it ought to be, you must allow", "prithee, read i' thy right wits."], ["so i do, madonna. but to read his right wits is to read thus. therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear.", "( fabian) read it you, sirrah.", "\"by the lord, madam, you wrong me, and the world shall know it. though you have put me into darkness and given your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have i the benefit of my senses as well as your ladyship. i have your own letter that induced me to the semblance i put on, with the which i doubt not but to do myself much right or you much shame. think of me as you please. i leave my duty a little unthought of and speak out of my injury. the madly used malvolio.\"", "did he write this?", "ay, madam.", "this savors not much of distraction.", "see him delivered, fabian; bring him hither.", "my lord so please you, these things further thought on, to think me as well a sister as a wife, one day shall crown the alliance on 't, so please you, here at my house and at my proper cost."], ["madam, i am most apt to embrace your offer. viola your master quits you, and for your service done him, so much against the mettle of your sex, so far beneath your soft and tender breeding, and since you called me \"master\" for so long, here is my hand. you shall from this time be your master's mistress.", "viola a sister! you are she.", "is this the madman?", "ay, my lord, this same. how now, malvolio!", "madam, you have done me wrong, notorious wrong.", "have i, malvolio? no.", "lady, you have. pray you, peruse that letter. you must not now deny it is your hand. write from it if you can, in hand or phrase; or say 'tis not your seal, not your invention: you can say none of this. well, grant it then and tell me, in the modesty of honor, why you have given me such clear lights of favor, bade me come smiling and cross-gartered to you, to put on yellow stockings, and to frown upon sir toby and the lighter people?"], ["and, acting this in an obedient hope, why have you suffered me to be imprisoned, kept in a dark house, visited by the priest, and made the most notorious geck and gull that e'er invention played on? tell me why.", "alas, malvolio, this is not my writing, though, i confess, much like the character. but out of question, 'tis maria's hand. and now i do bethink me, it was she first told me thou wast mad, then camest in smiling, and in such forms which here were presupposed upon thee in the letter. prithee, be content. this practice hath most shrewdly passed upon thee; but when we know the grounds and authors of it, thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge of thine own cause.", "good madam, hear me speak, and let no quarrel nor no brawl to come taint the condition of this present hour, which i have wonder'd at. in hope it shall not, most freely i confess, myself and toby set this device against malvolio here, upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts we had conceived against him. maria writ the letter at sir toby's great importance, in recompense whereof he hath married her. how with a sportful malice it was followed, may rather pluck on laughter than revenge, if that the injuries be justly weighed that have on both sides passed.", "malvolio alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!"], ["why, \"some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrown upon them.\" i was one, sir, in this interlude, one sir topas, sir, but that's all one. malvolio \"by the lord, fool, i am not mad.\" but do you remember? \"madam, why laugh you at such a barren rascal; an you smile not, he's gagged?\" and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.", "i'll be revenged on the whole pack of you.", "he hath been most notoriously abused.", "pursue him and entreat him to a peace.", "he hath not told us of the captain yet. when that is known and golden time convents, a solemn combination shall be made of our dear souls. meantime, sweet sister, we will not part from hence. cesario, come, for so you shall be, while you are a man. but when in other habits you are seen, orsino's mistress and his fancy's queen."], [""]]]