[[["no, our general's infatuation is out of control. his eyes used to glow with pride when he reviewed his troops. now his eyes devote themselves exclusively to a certain brown-skinned face. his heart used to burst the buckles on his breastplate in great fights, but now he's lost all temperance and dedicates his heart to satisfying the lust of an egyptian whore.", "look at them. take a good look, and you'll see that one of the three men who rule the world has turned into a whore's jester. look and see.", "if what you feel is really love, tell me how much.", "it would be a pretty stingy love if it could be counted and calculated.", "i want to measure the extent of your love, to see how far it stretches.", "then you would have to go beyond heaven, beyond earth.", "i have news from rome, my good lord.", "which irritaties me. give me a summary."], ["no, listen to it, antony. perhaps is angry with you. who knows, maybe the has orders for you: \"do this, do that; conquer that kingdom, liberate this one. do it or we'll condemn you.\"", "what, my love?", "maybe? no, most likely. you can't stay here any longer. caesar has sent your dismissal, so pay attention, antony. where's fulvia's summons excuse me, i should have said caesar's. or do fulvia and caesar both beckon you back to rome? call in the messengers and we'll find out. as surely as i am the queen of egypt, antony, you're blushing, which means you're caesar's servant. or that that bitch fulvia still has the power to humiliate you. call the messengers!", "and let the great empire fall. my place is here. kingdoms are only dirt. the soil feeds animals as well as people, so how does having a kingdom separate humans from beasts? the noblest thing is to do what we're doing, particularly when the couple is as well matched as we are. i demand that the world admit we are the perfect couple or else suffer the consequences."], ["what an enormous lie! why did he marry fulvia if he didn't love her? i'll pretend to be a fool and believe him. he'll never change.", "unless he is moved and inspired by cleopatra. now, since we love the feeling of being in love, let's not spoil the mood with serious discussion. we shouldn't spend a minute without some kind of amusement. what shall we do tonight?", "meet with the ambassadors.", "shame on you, stubborn queen! everything you do is attractive scolding, laughing, crying every emotion seems admirable when you express it. i won't see any messengers but yours. tonight we'll wander through the streets and observe the people. come, my queen. that's what you wanted to do last night. don't talk to us.", "does antony have so little respect for caesar?", "sir, sometimes he's like a different person, a person who can't measure up to the former antony."], ["i'm sad to say this confirms the stories being told about him in rome, which i had taken to be lies. well, i'll hope things change for the better soon. have a good night!"], ["lord alexas, sweet alexas, most anything alexas, almost the most consummate alexas, where's the fortuneteller you recommended so highly to the queen? oh, i only wish i knew the name of that husband you said he predicted will have a cheating wife!", "fortuneteller!", "what can i do for you?", "is this the man you recommended? are you the man who knows the future?", "i can understand a few of nature's infinite secrets.", "give him your hand to read.", "bring the dessert in right away, and make sure there's enough wine to toast cleopatra's health.", "kind sir, give me a good fortune.", "i don't make fortunes; i only see them.", "then see a good one for me.", "your beauty will be even greater than it is now.", "he means i'll get fat.", "no, he means you'll use makeup when you're old.", "may my wrinkles forbid that!", "don't joke about his predictions. pay attention.", "quiet!", "you will love more than you are loved."], ["than from love.", "just listen to him.", "be kind now and tell me some excellent fortune. tell me that i'll marry three kings before noon and be widowed by all of them. tell me i'll have a child when i'm fifty who will be honored even by . let me marry octavius caesar and become my queen's equal.", "you will outlive the queen.", "oh, excellent! i love long life better than .", "you have already had better fortune than the future will bring.", "then my children will probably be illegitimate. tell me, please: how many boys and girls will i have?", "if every time you wished for a child you could have had one, you would have a million children.", "get out of here, you fool! since you're a fortuneteller i won't bring charges of witchcraft against you.", "you seem to think no one outside of your bedroom knows what you wish.", "never mind. tell iras's fortune.", "we'll all want our fortune told.", "my fortune like that of many of us tonight is to go drunk to bed.", "there's a palm that will predict a chaste life, if nothing else."], ["like the predicts famine.", "oh stop it, you lusty bed-hopper. you can't see the future.", "well, if a moist palm isn't a clear sign of promiscuity, then i can't scratch my own ear. please, tell her an ordinary fortune.", "your fortunes are the same.", "but how? how is that possible? give me details.", "i've said what i have to say.", "isn't my fortune just a little better than hers? by an inch, even?", "well, if you could have just an inch of better fortune than me, where would you like the improvement?", "not in my husband's nose.", "may heaven save us from indecent thoughts! alexas! come and tell his fortune. let him marry a woman he can't satisfy, dear , i pray! and then let her die, and give him someone worse. then let die, and let her replacement be even worse. and so on until the last one, who is unfaithful with at least fifty other men and laughs at him until he dies. i beg you to grant my prayer, good isis, even though it means you deny me something more important for myself. good isis, i beg you!", "amen, dear goddess. listen to our prayer. if it's sad to see a handsome man with a cheating wife, it's a tragedy to see an ugly thug with a wife who's faithful. therefore, dear isis, do the right thing and give him the fortune he deserves."], ["amen.", "see! if they could make me a cuckold, they'd whore themselves in order to see it done.", "quiet! here comes antony.", "it's not him; it's the queen.", "have you seen my lord?", "no, lady.", "wasn't he here?", "no, madam.", "he was in a good mood, and then suddenly he started thinking of rome. enobarbus?", "madam?", "find him and bring him here. where's alexas?", "here, at your service. here comes my lord.", "everyone come with me.", "your wife, fulvia, mustered her army first.", "against my brother lucius?", "yes. but that war ended as soon as circumstances made it advisable for them to join together against caesar. but in their very first battle, caesar won and drove them out of italy."], ["well, give me the worst news.", "the bearer of bad news is often blamed for it.", "only if the hearer is a fool or a coward. go on. as far as i'm concerned, what's past is done. it's like this: as long as a person tells me the truth, even though it means my death, i will listen as though he praised me.", "the news is disturbing. , with the army he led in parthia, has conquered all of asia, all the way to the euphrates river, including syria, lydia, and ionia, while", "\"while antony...\" is what you want to say.", "oh, my lord!", "speak plainly. don't tone down what the people are saying. call cleopatra what the romans call her. use fulvia's abusive language. freely scold me for my faults with as much severity as an enemy with truth on his side. it's easy to err when left to our own devices, but criticism helps us to see our faults and correct them.", "good-bye for a while."], ["i'll be at your service.", "what's the news from . tell me.", "the man from sicyon", "is he here?", "he's waiting outside.", "have him come in.", "i must break cleopatra's powerful hold over me or else i'll lose myself in foolish infatuation.", "what's your message?", "your wife, fulvia, is dead.", "where did she die?", "in sicyon. in this letter you'll find details of her illness and other, more serious matters that concern you.", "leave me.", "a great spirit has gone from the world! this is what i wanted. once it's gone, the very thing we reject becomes what we desire. what's enjoyable one day becomes the opposite as time rolls around. now that she's gone, i want her. now i would call her back, though i pushed her away. i have to break from this beguiling queen. the time i've wasted here has caused ten thousand more problems than the ones i know about are you there, enobarbus?"], ["what would you like, sir?", "i have to leave right away.", "that will kill our lovers. we know how much they suffer if we are unkind to them. if we leave, it will feel like nothing less than death to them.", "i must be gone.", "if it's that important, then let the women die. it would be a pity to throw them away for nothing, but if it's a matter of choosing between them and a great cause, then they're worthless. if cleopatra hears even a breath of this, she'll die immediately. i've seen her claim to be dying twenty times before, and for far less reason. i think there must be something invigorating about death, since she dies with such enthusiasm.", "she's more cunning than anyone can imagine.", "alas, sir, no, her feelings come from pure love, not cleverness. her sighs and tears are like great winds and floods. she has more storms and tempests in her than a weather almanac. her temper is not a trick or a skill if it is, she can make it rain as well as .", "i wish i'd never seen her!", "then you'd have missed an amazing piece of work, sir, and your trip would have been poorer for the loss."], ["fulvia is dead.", "pardon me?", "fulvia is dead.", "fulvia?", "dead.", "then you should offer the gods a sacrifice to show your thanks. when a man's wife dies, he can be comforted by the knowledge that there are replacements to be found. if fulvia were the last woman on earth, there would be a reason to grieve. but in this way, grief and comfort appear together. the only kind of tears you should shed in this case are the kind you might get from holding an onion to your nose.", "i must go and continue the business fulvia started.", "the business you began here needs you as well especially the business with cleopatra, which only you can attend to.", "enough of this frivolous talk. give our officers notice of our intentions. i'll tell the queen the reason for our quick departure and get her permission to leave. fulvia's death and the pressing concerns related to it are not the only reasons i am eager to go; friends in rome have also sent many letters advising my return. sextus pompeius has challenged caesar. his fleet controls the sea. our fickle citizens who never reward service until that service is over are now giving all the rights and honors won by pompey the great to his son, sextus. sextus has great honor and power, and his spirit and energy are even greater, all of which makes him the most formidable soldier in the empire. the empire may be in danger if he's not restrained before he reaches his full potential. there are many troubles brewing now that have yet to become full-fledged threats. relay our intentions to the officers who will be in charge of the move."], ["i will."], ["where is he?", "i haven't seen him recently.", "find out where he is, who's with him, and what he's doing. don't tell him i sent you. if he's sad, tell him i'm dancing. if he's happy, say that i've suddenly taken sick. hurry, and come back.", "madam, i think if you love him so much, you aren't using the best way to get him to reciprocate.", "what should i do that i'm not doing?", "always give him his way. never contradict him.", "you advise me like a fool. that's the way to lose him.", "don't push him too far. i wish you'd be patient. we come to hate that which controls us.", "but here comes antony.", "i am sick and sullen.", "i'm sorry to have to say this", "help me away from here, dear charmian! i shall faint. i won't be able to go on this way much longer. human nature isn't built to withstand this."], ["now, my dearest queen", "please, stand farther away from me.", "what's the matter?", "i can see in your eyes there's been some good news. what, does your wife say you can come home? i wish she'd never let you come. don't let her say i kept you. i have no power over you. you belong to her.", "the gods know", "oh, never has a queen been so betrayed as i have been. i knew from the first it would be this way.", "cleopatra", "how could i have ever thought that you would be faithful and true, even though your vows of love shook the heavens themselves you, who were unfaithful to fulvia? it was wild insanity to believe promises made by the mouth and not the heart. such false vows are broken as soon as they are spoken.", "most sweet queen", "no, please don't try to excuse your departure. just say good-bye and go. when you begged to stay, that was the time for words. you didn't want to go then! you saw eternity in my lips and eyes, and happiness in the arch of my eyebrows. then, all my parts seemed angelic to you. my features are still that beautiful or else you, the greatest soldier in the world, have become the greatest liar by overpraising them."], ["what do you mean, lady?", "i wish i were as big and strong as you. then you'd see the courage that lives in the queen of egypt.", "listen to me, queen. there is an emergency i must take care of, but my whole heart will remain here with you. my italy is full of civil war. sextus pompeius is sailing toward the port of rome. when two domestic opponents are equally matched as we are against pompey factions will form on the smallest of pretexts. when a formerly hated man grows powerful, he suddenly finds himself with many supporters. pompey, who was once condemned, now wields his father's power, and all the citizens who have grievances against the government are joining him. pompey's numbers are steadily growing, and the government is ready to do something desperate. but my personal motivation and that which should move you most to sanction my departure is that fulvia is dead.", "i may not have outlived the foolishness of my youth, but i'm not that childishly nave. is it possible fulvia is dead?", "she's dead, my queen."], ["look at this. take your royal time and read about the quarrels she encouraged. and saving the best for last, read when and where she died.", "oh, unfaithful lover! seeing how you take fulvia's death, i can see how you would react to mine.", "stop arguing and listen to my plans. whether i go ahead with them or not is completely up to you. i swear by the sun that when i leave here, it will be as your faithful servant. i will make either peace or war, whichever you prefer.", "cut my corset laces, charmian, so i can breathe. hurry! no, leave it alone. i waver easily between sickness and health. just as antony loves.", "control yourself, my precious queen, and concede that my love is true. it has endured many genuine trials.", "that's what fulvia told me. i beg you, turn away and cry for her. then say good-bye to me and tell me those tears were for my benefit. good. now perform a scene for me, using your excellent skills of playacting, and pretend that you're being honorable and righteous."], ["you'll make me angry. no more of this.", "i know you can do better than that, but it'll do for now.", "i swear by my sword", "swear by your shield, too! he's getting better, but still it's not his best. see, charmian, how well this mighty roman portrays anger?", "i'll leave you, lady.", "polite sir, let me say one thing. sir, you and i must part company no, that's not it. sir, you and i were lovers no, that's not it, either. you already know all that. there's something i'd like to oh, i've forgotten what i wanted to say. just as antony has forgotten me.", "if you weren't the queen of immaturity, i'd think you were immaturity itself.", "it's difficult to have such immaturity so close to my heart, but bear with me. even the traits that become me most kill me when you don't approve of them. your honor is the reason you are leaving. so i beg you not to listen to my foolishness. may the gods be with you. may your sword be victorious and everything you do succeed."], ["let's go. come with me. our imminent separation so occupies our thoughts that even though you stay here, you come with me, and even though i leave here, i stay with you."], ["now you'll see, lepidus, that i don't disdain our noble ally because of a personal whim. here's the news from alexandra: antony fishes, drinks, and celebrates all night. he's become as frivolous and self-indulgent as 's queen, cleopatra. he rarely attends to his duties or acknowledges he has partners to be considered. here's a man who is the epitome of all the vices known to man.", "i can't believe there could be enough vice in the world to outshine all the good in him. his faults stand out because they must be compared to all his virtues, like stars that shine brightly against the dark night sky. they're more likely to be the result of inherited weakness than independent choice.", "you're too forgiving. let's say, for argument's sake, that it's not improper to fool around with ptolemy's wife, or to trade a kingdom for a joke. that it's fine to engage in drinking matches with inferiors, or stumble drunkenly through the streets in the middle of the day, or get into fist fights with sweaty servants. even if we said that this behavior suits him though only a man with a perfect character could avoid being disgraced by such antics there's no excuse for the extra work we've had to take on while he's been off amusing himself. if he's been spending his leisure time in lustful pursuits, then he'll be punished with venereal diseases, and that's his business. but he's wasting time and resources vital to our cause and endangering both his position and ours. he should be chastised, like any boy who knows what's right but chooses to satisfy his desires regardless."], ["here's more news.", "we've followed your commands, lord caesar. you shall have hourly updates regarding the situation at sea. pompey has a strong navy. all the people who only stayed with you out of fear are gathering at the port to join him, in the opinion he's been treated unfairly.", "i should have known it. it's been this way ever since the first government was organized. people will transfer their support to a strong figure until he becomes their actual leader. then they will value their former leader, even though the loss of their support has made him powerless. the common crowd changes like the tide, to and fro, serving whoever is on the rise. their power is worn away by their fickleness.", "caesar, i have news about menecrates and menas, notorious pirates who prowl the sea in a variety of ships. they've made many raids upon italy and the naval patrols go pale at even the thought of resisting them. the young, energetic men are joining pompey. these pirates can capture a ship as soon as it leaves the harbor, since the simple mention of the name \"pompey\" carries as much power as a fleet of troops in battle."], ["antony, it's time to stop your wild hedonism. when you were defeated at the battle of modena where you killed the consuls, hirtius and pansa and then driven away, you had to face hunger and thirst. and even though you were brought up as a gentleman, you patiently tolerated more hardships than savages could withstand. you drank horses' urine and water from scum-covered puddles that even animals would refuse. though you were used to the finest foods, you didn't turn up your nose at the bitterest berries on the thorniest bushes. you even ate bark from trees, as deer do in winter. going over the alps, you ate strange meat that some men would rather die than consume. and you went through all this the comparison between then and now shames you in such a soldier-like way that you didn't seem to suffer at all.", "it's too bad.", "let's hope his sense of shame will send him back to rome quickly. it's time that we brought our armies into the field. let's call a council of war immediately. pompey is making the most of our absence."], ["tomorrow, caesar, i'll be able to tell you what land and sea forces i can raise for this war.", "i'll be getting my own figures together in the meantime. good-bye.", "good-bye, my lord. if you receive any more news, please share it with me.", "don't worry, that goes without saying."], ["charmian!", "madam?", "ah, give me some to drink.", "why, madam?", "so i can sleep away the time while my antony is gone.", "you think about him too much.", "that's treason!", "i hope not, madam.", "eunuch! mardian!", "what can i do for your highness?", "i don't want to hear you sing. i'm not interested in anything a eunuch can do. it's a good thing for you that, being castrated, you can better concentrate on my needs. do you have desires?", "yes, dear madam.", "indeed?", "well, not in deed, madam, since i can't do anything unchaste. but i do have intense passions and i do think about .", "oh, charmian, where do you think he is now? is he standing or sitting? or is he walking? or is he on his horse? oh, how fortunate that horse is to have antony on him. do well, horse. do you know whom it is you carry? a man who carries responsibility for a third of the world on his shoulders. he's speaking now, or perhaps he's whispering, \"where's my serpent of the nile?\" for that's his pet name for me. i'm killing myself with this provocative speculation... are you thinking about me? even though i've been darkened by the sun and wrinkled with age? caesar, with your broad forehead, when you were alive,"], ["queen of egypt, greetings!", "you are nothing like mark antony! but since you come from him, you're saturated with his healing spirit. how does it go with my magnificent mark antony?", "the last thing he did before sending me off, dear queen, was to kiss the last of many such kisses this indian pearl for you.", "his speech is stored in my heart.", "my ear must pull it out.", "\"good friend,\" he said, \"say that the faithful roman sends an oyster's treasure to the great queen of egypt, and that he plans to enhance this meager gift by adding new kingdoms to her empire. tell her that the entire east shall call her queen.\" then he nodded and solemnly mounted an armored warhorse, which neighed so loudly it effectively silenced anything i might have said in reply.", "was he sad or happy?", "he was like that time of year halfway between the extremes of hot and cold: he was neither sad nor happy."], ["oh, what an even disposition he has! observe, observe good charmian! that's exactly how he is! just notice. he wasn't sad, because he knows that his disposition affects others. he wasn't merry, because to be merry would indicate that he had forgotten his love in egypt. he was somewhere in the middle, between them... oh, heavenly mixture! whether you are sad or merry, the intensity of either suits you like no one else... did you meet my messengers on your way here?", "yes, madam, twenty different messengers. why did you send so many?", "whoever is born on a day i forget to send a message to antony will die a beggar. bring ink and paper, charmian. welcome, my good alexas. charmian, did i ever love caesar as much as this?", "oh, that splendid caesar!", "may you choke on any other sentiments like that! say, \"that splendid antony.\"", "the courageous caesar!", "by isis, i'll give you bloody teeth if you ever compare caesar with antony, my best man among men."], ["pardon me, but i'm just repeating what you yourself have said.", "that was when i was young and inexperienced and didn't know what passion was. but come. go get me ink and paper. he shall have different messages every day if i have to depopulate egypt to send them."], ["if the great gods are just, they will help the most honest men.", "you should know, noble pompey, that although the gods may delay action, that doesn't mean they will necessarily refuse their help.", "but while we pray and wait for that help, the cause we petition for may be lost.", "sometimes we don't know what's best for us and ask for things that may harm us. in that case, the wise gods deny our prayers for our own good.", "i'll do well. the people are on my side, and i'm in charge of the sea. my forces are growing, and everything i know tells me it's all coming together. mark antony is at dinner in egypt and won't be going outside to make war. caesar loses supporters wherever he raises money. lepidus flatters both of them, as they flatter him, but he doesn't love them, and they don't love him.", "caesar and lepidus are organizing their military operation. they have a massive army.", "where did you hear this? it's not true."], ["from silvius, sir.", "he's dreaming. i know they're in rome together, hoping for antony to return. lecherous cleopatra, may all the charms of love soften those withered lips! join your witchcraft with your beauty, and let antony's lust combine with both. keep this libertine occupied with endless debauchery. keep his brain drunk and his appetite unsatisfied, so that sleeping and eating make him drowsy and forgetful of his duties, like the does.", "what's the news, varrius?", "this news is absolutely true: mark antony is expected to arrive in rome at any hour now. in the time since he left egypt, he could have traveled an even longer distance.", "i would have listened to less important news with greater enthusiasm. menas, i had no idea this amorous glutton would have put on his helmet for such an insignificant war. his military ability is double that of the other two. we must form a better opinion of ourselves if our uprising can pull the insatiable antony's attention away from that egyptian widow."], ["i don't expect caesar and antony will have a very friendly reunion. antony's dead wife raised an army against him, as did his brother, though i don't think antony instigated it.", "menas, i don't understand how minor quarrels can be superseded by greater ones. if it weren't for the fact that we oppose all three of them together, they'd be fighting each other. they certainly have enough provocation. but it's possible the fear of us may mend their petty differences, though how that will work out, we cannot say. it will be as the gods see fit. in any case, our survival depends on putting together the strongest force possible. let's go, menas."], ["good enobarbus, you would be doing a very good thing if you advised your captain to speak calmly and quietly.", "i will advise him to speak as he usually does. if caesar makes him mad, let antony stand tall and speak as loudly as mars, the god of war. by jupiter, if i were antony, i wouldn't shave my beard today. i'd leave it long and dare caesar to insult me by pulling on it, just so i could fight him.", "this is not the time for dwelling on personal grievances.", "it's always appropriate to deal with matters as they arise.", "but major issues must come before minor ones.", "not if the minor ones come up first.", "you speak out of passion, but i beg you not to stir things up. here comes the noble antony.", "and there comes caesar.", "if we can come to an agreement here, we'll move on to parthia. listen, ventidius.", "i don't know, maecenas. ask agrippa."], ["good friends, the cause that joined us was noble. don't let some petty quarrel tear us apart. let's discuss this calmly. when we argue our differences with raised voices, we do more harm than good. so i plead with you to use reasonable words as you discuss these unreasonable deeds, and don't lose your tempers.", "you're right. if we were in front of our armies, about to fight, i would do this.", "welcome to rome.", "thank you.", "have a seat.", "after you.", "no, after you.", "i hear you've interpreted some of my actions as being improper, when they weren't improper at all or if they were, their impropriety didn't concern you.", "i should be ridiculed if i were offended so easily and laughed at even more for speaking of you disrespectfully, when i had no reason to speak of you at all."], ["caesar, what did my stay in egypt have to do with you?", "no more than my staying here in rome might mean to you in egypt. but if you conspired against my position while you were there, i might be interested in the reason for your stay in egypt.", "how do you mean, \"conspired\"?", "you can judge for yourself what i mean. your wife and brother led troops against me, claiming to be fighting in your name. they said they were acting for you.", "you're mistaken. my brother didn't use my name to justify his rebellion. i talked to some reliable participants in that battle. on the contrary, his fight was with both of us. he rejected my authority as much as yours. since you and i share a common cause, wouldn't his actions against you be hostile to me as well? i've already sent the proof in my letters. if you want to pick a fight, you'll have to find a more substantial excuse.", "you defend yourself by blaming my judgment, but you're just making up feeble excuses."], ["not true, not true. you know i would never approve a war against my own cause. as for my wife, if only you had such a wife. it's easier to rule a third of the world than a wife like that.", "we should all have wives like that. then the women could go to war with the men.", "i had no control over her uprisings, caesar, which arose from her impatience and were shrewdly undertaken, as well. i'm sorry she caused you so much trouble. but you can't blame me for her offenses.", "i sent you a letter while you were carousing in alexandria. you put my letters in your pocket without reading them and then mocked my messenger out of the room.", "sir, he burst into the room without invitation, just after i had come from an important banquet with three kings. i was not myself, as a result of the wine. the next day i explained all this to him, which was as good as begging his pardon. let's not fight over this fellow. if we must argue, let us remove him from our arguments."], ["you've broken the terms of our sworn agreement. you will never be able to say the same about me.", "easy, caesar.", "no, lepidus, let him say what's on his mind. now he slanders my honor, which is sacred to me. go on, caesar. what part of the agreement did i break?", "you agreed to send me troops and weapons when i needed them. you refused me both.", "i overlooked your request, but i did not deny it. your request came at a time when the poisonous effects of reveling caused me to be unaware of my own actions. i will apologize as much as is appropriate, but my apology will not diminish my great stature or if i am denied that honor, i will withhold my military might. the truth is that to get me out of egypt, fulvia provoked riots here. and though i am only indirectly the cause of all this trouble, i ask your pardon to the extent that my honor permits me to lower myself in such a situation.", "spoken like a gentleman.", "if it's okay with you, you should not press your grievances any further, but realize that the current situation should be enough to reconcile you."], ["well put, maecenas.", "or you can pretend to settle your differences until this matter with pompey is finished. you can argue as much as you like when there's nothing else to do.", "you are only a soldier. be quiet.", "oh, i'd forgotten that no one's supposed to speak the truth.", "it's not appropriate for a soldier to be part of a discussion among noblemen. don't speak any further.", "as you please. i'll pretend to be a conscious stone, and think without speaking.", "i agree with what he says, though i don't care for the way he says it. it's not possible for us to be friends anymore. we're too different, in both our dispositions and actions. but if there were something that could join us together again, i would go to the ends of the world to find it.", "may i speak, caesar.", "what is it, agrippa?", "you have a beautiful half-sister, octavia. great mark antony is a widower now.", "you'd better not make that suggestion, agrippa. if cleopatra heard you, you would be well punished for your audacity."], ["it's true i'm not married, caesar. let me hear what agrippa has to say.", "if antony were to take octavia as his wife, you two would be bound in eternal friendship. as brothers, your hearts would be tied together in an unbreakable knot. she is beautiful enough for the best of men. her virtue and grace are unparalleled. with this marriage, all the petty jealousies that now seem huge, and all the great fears that are dangerous in themselves, would disappear. people would become used to speaking the truth rather than gossip. since she would love both of you, you two would be joined in that love. excuse my bluntness. this is not a spur-of-the-moment suggestion. i have been considering this for some time, in my duties to both of you.", "what do you say, caesar?", "i'd rather hear your reaction to this first.", "if i said to agrippa, \"i agree. make it happen,\" does agrippa have the power to make it so?"], ["he has both my power and my influence over octavia.", "i wouldn't dream of opposing such an obviously promising idea. let's shake on it. if you go through with this plan, from now on we'll be brothers, and our love for one another will guide our actions.", "here's my hand.", "i give you a sister whom i love more than a brother ever loved any sister. she will be the bond that joins our kingdoms and our hearts. we'll never fight again.", "i'm happy to say \"amen\" to that!", "i didn't think i would ever fight pompey. he's shown me unusual deference lately, and i must repay his favors or risk a reputation for ingratitude. that done, i can turn against him.", "there isn't much time. either we go after pompey or he'll come after us."], ["where is he now?", "near .", "how large is his land army?", "large and increasing. but his navy rules the sea.", "that's what i hear. i wish we'd had this conversation sooner. let's get down to business and yet, before we get ready for war, let's take care of that business we just discussed.", "with pleasure. i'll introduce you to my sister. follow me.", "come with us, lepidus.", "noble antony, even illness couldn't keep me away.", "welcome back from egypt, sir.", "you've become caesar's right hand man, maecenas! it's good to see you too, agrippa.", "good enobarbus!", "we can be happy that things have been resolved so agreeably. and i see you survived your time in egypt.", "yes, sir, it was tough. we confused the daytime by sleeping through it, and made the night merry with our drinking."], ["we heard that once you were served eight wild boars roasted whole for breakfast for only twelve people! is that true?", "that was nothing. there were many even more memorable feasts.", "she's a remarkable lady, if the rumors are to be believed.", "from the first time antony saw her, sailing on her barge on the , he was hers.", "she made quite an appearance there, or else my informant invented a very flattering description of her.", "i'll tell you. her barge looked like a golden throne upon the waves, burning bright with the sun's reflections. the rear deck was covered with hammered gold. the sails were dyed purple, and they were perfumed so heavily that they made the air seem dizzy with love. the oars were made of silver, and the oarsmen rowed in time to flute music. as the oars beat the water, the waves seemed to speed up as if excited by lust. cleopatra's appearance was indescribable. as she reclined under a canopy woven from gold thread, she was more beautiful than any artist's idealized portrait of the goddess venus. pretty, cupid-like boys stood on either side of her, smiling and cooling her with multicolored fans, which seemed to fan the flames in her cheeks even as they cooled them, undoing what they did."], ["how excellent for antony!", "her ladies-in-waiting like , or mermaids tended to cleopatra as she watched them, and their graceful movements added to the beauty of the scene. it seemed as if a mermaid were steering. the silken sails and ropes swelled in the wind, expertly handled by the ladies' soft hands. people on the wharves could smell exotic perfume wafting from the barge as it passed them. all the people came out to see her, and antony, waiting for her in the marketplace, was left alone. even the air itself would have gone to look at cleopatra, if that wouldn't have caused an unnatural vacuum in the atmosphere.", "extraordinary egyptian!", "when she landed at the port, antony sent an invitation for her to come to supper. she replied by saying that it would be better for him to be her guest instead. our courteous antony, who has never said \"no\" to any woman, after spending plenty of time being groomed by the barber, goes to the feast. for that simple meal, he paid with his heart even though it was only his eyes that were satisfied."], ["royal seductress! she lured julius caesar into her bed, he made love to her, and she bore .", "i saw her once hop forty feet down the street. when she stopped she was so out of breath that she was panting. her beauty made even that weakness seem perfect, and even in her breathlessness she seemed to pour out breath.", "now antony has to leave her completely.", "he'll never leave her. age won't wither her, and her charms are so varied that she never grows boring. with other women, the more familiar you grow with them the less appealing they become. cleopatra, on the other hand, makes you desire her the more you see her. even her worst faults are charming, and holy priests bless her even when she acts the slut.", "if beauty, wisdom, and modesty can settle antony's restless heart, octavia will be the best thing that has ever happened to him.", "let's go. good enobarbus, consider yourself my guest as long as you're here.", "i humbly thank you."], [], ["there will be times when my duties and responsibilities take me away from you.", "and i will spend our time apart on my knees, praying for you.", "good night, sir. my octavia, don't believe everything you hear about me. i haven't always lived a conventional life, but the future will be by the book. good night, dear lady. good night, sir.", "good night.", "now, , i hear you wish you were back in egypt.", "i wish i had never left egypt and that you had never come to egypt.", "tell me why, if you can.", "it's a feeling, but nothing i can put into words. but you had better get back to egypt again.", "tell me who shall have the better luck, caesar or me?", "caesar. so you'd better not stay with him, antony. your guardian angel is noble, courageous, significant, and unmatched when caesar's not around. but when you are with him, your angel is weakened and easily frightened. that's why there must be space between you."], ["don't speak of this again.", "to none but you, only to you. you will surely lose any game you play with caesar. with his natural luck, he will beat you even against the odds. your light dulls when he is near. i repeat: your angel is afraid to inspire you when you're around him, but when he goes away it becomes brilliant again.", "leave now. tell ventidius i want to speak with him.", "i'll send him to parthia. whether he's truly gifted or just lucky, what the fortuneteller said is true. even the dice obey caesar. when we compete in sports, my skill is defeated by his luck. if we pick numbers in a lottery, he wins. his roosters always beat mine at the cockfights. his quails beat mine, even against the odds, when mine have the advantage. i'll return to egypt. though i've made this marriage to keep peace with caesar, my pleasure remains in the east, with cleopatra.", "come here, ventidius. you must go to parthia. your authorization is ready. come with me and i'll get it for you."], [], ["don't spend any more time here. go tell your generals to hurry their preparations.", "sir, we'll follow as soon as mark antony kisses octavia good-bye.", "good-bye then, until the time i see you dressed in your battle gear, which will suit you both very well.", "according to my reckoning, we'll get to mt. misena before you, lepidus.", "you're taking a shorter route. my plans take me a roundabout way. you'll get there two days before me.", "good luck, sir.", "farewell."], ["play me some music. music feeds the melancholy moods of us lovers.", "musicians, come in!", "never mind. let's play billiards. play with me, charmian.", "my arm is sore. you'll have a better game with mardian.", "playing with a eunuch is the same as playing with a woman. will you play with me, sir?", "i'll do my best, madam.", "when a person tries in good faith, even if he fails he cannot be blamed. i don't want to play now. give me my fishing rod. we'll go to the river. with my music playing in the background, i'll lure fish. my hook will go through their slimy jaws and as i pull them up i'll imagine each one is antony. i'll say, \"aha! i caught you!\"", "it was funny when you and antony bet on who could catch the first fish. you had a diver put a salted fish on his hook. he was so excited as he hurried to pull it in!", "that time? oh, there were so many fun times. i would play some trick on him and laugh until he lost his patience. then, that night, i would laugh with him while we made love until he was patient again. then by nine in the morning i would have him so drunk i could dress him in my clothes while i wore the sword he used at the famous battle of philippi."], ["oh! news from italy! cram your good news into my ears. it's been so long since i've heard from him.", "madam, madam", "antony's dead! if you say that, you bastard, you'll kill your queen. if you say he's healthy and free, i'll give you money and you may kiss my hand. kings have trembled to kiss this hand.", "let me say first, madam, that he is well.", "well then, here's more money for you. but you know, sirrah, we customarily say that the dead are well. if that's what you mean, i'll melt this gold and pour it down your throat that speaks these hateful words.", "good madam, let me speak.", "all right, i will. but you don't look as if you bring good news. if antony is free and healthy, you shouldn't wear such a sour face while bringing such good news. if he's not well, you should arrive like a with snakes for hair, not in the shape of a normal man.", "do you want to hear my news?"], ["i have half a mind to hit you before you speak again. but if antony is alive, healthy, friendly with caesar, and not caesar's prisoner, i'll shower you with gold and pearls.", "madam, he's well.", "that's well spoken.", "and he's friendly with caesar.", "you are an honest man.", "caesar and he are better friends than ever.", "i'm going to make you a rich man.", "but yet, madam", "i don't like the sound of \"but yet.\" it reverses all the good that came before it. damn those words, \"but yet!\" \"but yet\" is like a jailer about to bring out some horrible criminal. please, my friend, give me all the news, both good and bad, at the same time. you say he's friendly with caesar, healthy, and free.", "i didn't say free, madam. no, i didn't say that. he's bound to octavia.", "for what favor?", "for the favor of sleeping in her bed."], ["i'm sick, charmian.", "he's married to octavia, madam.", "may you die of the worst disease!", "good madam, be patient.", "what did you say to me?", "get out, you horrible bastard, or i'll gouge out your eyes. i'll scalp you.", "i'll have you whipped with wire and soaked in brine like a pickle, making your pain linger.", "gracious madam, i only brought the news. i didn't make the match.", "if you say it isn't true, i'll give you a province and make you rich. the blows i gave you already will make up for your upsetting me. and on top of that i'll give you whatever you ask for.", "he's married, madam.", "rogue, you've lived too long!", "no way, then, i'll run. what's the matter with you, madam? i haven't done anything to you."], ["good madam, restrain yourself. the man hasn't done anything wrong.", "even innocents cannot always escape disaster. may egypt drown in the nile and all good creatures turn into poisonous snakes. call that servant back. even though i'm mad, i won't bite him. call him!", "he's afraid to come in.", "i won't hurt him. my hands are tainted if they hit an inferior, especially since i myself am the cause of my own distress.", "come here, sir. it may be honest, but it's never wise to bring bad news. you can give good news in many ways, but let bad news interpret itself as you tell it.", "i've only done my duty.", "is he married? i can't hate you any more than i already do if you repeat that he is.", "he's married, madam."], ["may the gods destroy you! do you maintain the same story?", "do you want me to lie, madam?", "oh, i wish you had lied, even if it meant half my kingdom would be submerged and filled with snakes. go, get out! even if you were as handsome as , your face would be ugly to me. is he really married?", "i beg your highness' pardon.", "is he really married?", "please don't be offended that i don't want to offend you any more. it's not fair to punish me for something you make me do. he's married to octavia.", "it's too bad that antony's fault should make you look like a jerk. you didn't have anything to do with it. go away. the merchandise you bring from rome is too expensive for me. let it stay in your inventory until it bankrupts you.", "be patient, your highness.", "when i have praised antony, i've disparaged caesar.", "many times, madam.", "i'm being repaid for that now. help me out of here. i feel faint. oh, iras, charmian! it doesn't matter. good alexas, go ask that fellow to describe octavia. how old is she? what kind of disposition does she have? don't let him leave out the color of her hair. bring me his answers quickly."], ["let antony be purged from my life forever but no, don't let him, charmian. even though half of him is like a , the other half is like mars. ask alexas to also ask him how tall she is. feel sorry for me, charmian, but don't talk to me. help me get to my bedroom."], ["", "it's proper that we speak first, which is why we sent our proposals ahead of us for your consideration. if you've had time to think over these points, let us know whether they will relieve your frustration. if yes, then a lot of brave young men can return to sicily who would otherwise die here.", "i address the three of you, the sole rulers of this world and the main arbiters of the gods' will. i don't know why my father's death shouldn't be avenged, since he has a son and friends to do it. you avenged julius caesar's death at philippi, where his ghost haunted his killer, brutus. why did cassius conspire against caesar? and why did the honorable, well-intentioned brutus and the others, men devoted to the ideal of freedom, assassinate caesar? they didn't want one man to be king in rome. and that's why i've built my navy, which is so huge that the weight of the ships makes the sea foam with anger. i will punish rome for her ingratitude toward my noble father."], ["take your time.", "pompey, you cannot frighten us with your navy. we'll meet you at sea. you know that on land our army is far greater than yours.", "yes, on land you do outnumber me. even more since you annexed my father's house and lands. but since, , you don't build anything for yourself, live in those lands as long as you can.", "to get back to the matter at hand, what do you think of our proposal?", "that's the point.", "don't let us talk you into anything, but consider carefully the value of our offers.", "and consider the possible consequences of fighting against us, in the hopes of gaining a greater fortune.", "you have offered me the lands of sicily and sardinia. in return, i must clear the sea of pirates and send tributes of wheat to rome. if i agree to this, we may leave unharmed, with our shields undented.", "that's our offer."], ["you should know that when i came here i was prepared to accept your offer. but mark antony made me somewhat angry. though it would be nobler to for me not to speak of this good act myself, you should know that when caesar and your brother were fighting, your mother came to sicily for refuge. i welcomed her gladly.", "i heard what you did for her, pompey, and want to give you the many thanks i owe you.", "let me shake your hand.", "i didn't think i would see you here.", "the east is very seductive. i have you to thank for my trip here; i wouldn't have left egypt otherwise, and i have benefited from it.", "you've changed since the last time i saw you.", "well, i cannot tell how my difficult life has weathered my face, but i will never let those difficulties subdue my courage."], ["it's good we had this meeting.", "i hope it works out for the best, lepidus. so we are in agreement. please have the contract written up so we can all sign it.", "that's the next thing on the agenda.", "we'll have celebration feasts for each other before we go our separate ways. let's draw lots to see who will host the first one.", "i'll give the first one, pompey.", "no, antony. pick one of these lots. whether your banquet is first or last, your egyptian cooking will make it the best. i heard that julius caesar got fat from all the feasting there.", "you've heard a lot.", "i mean well, sir.", "i'm sure you do.", "i've heard a lot more. i heard that apollodorus carried", "that's enough of that. yes, it's true.", "what did he carry, please?", "a certain queen to caesar, .", "now i know who you are. how are you, soldier?", "i'm well, and probably will be for a while, as i hear that four feasts are being prepared."], ["let me shake your hand. i've never been your enemy. i've seen you fight and envied your skill.", "sir, i wouldn't say i was your friend, but i've praised you when you deserved ten times more praise than i gave.", "enjoy your frankness; it suits you. i invite you all aboard my ship. after you, my lords?", "show us the way, sir.", "come with me.", "your father would never have agreed to this treaty, pompey. you and i have met, sir.", "i think it was at sea.", "that it was, sir.", "you've done well at sea.", "and you've done well on land.", "i'll flatter anyone who flatters me though what i've accomplished on land cannot be denied.", "neither can my accomplishments at sea."], ["yes, for your own safety, you should deny one thing: you have been a great thief at sea.", "as you were on land.", "that's the one part of my service on land i do deny. but let's shake hands, menas.", "if our eyes were policemen, they might capture two thieves at once while we're embracing.", "men's faces are truthful, whatever their hands do.", "but no beautiful woman has an honest face.", "that's no lie. they steal hearts.", "we came here to fight against you.", "for my part, i'm sorry this battle turned into a drinking match. today pompey laughs away his fortune.", "if that's true, he won't get it back by crying.", "that's the truth, sir. we didn't expect mark antony to be here. is he married to cleopatra?", "caesar's sister is named octavia.", "that's true, sir. she was previously caius marcellus' wife.", "but she is now mark antony's wife.", "excuse me, sir?", "it's true.", "then caesar and he will always be united.", "if i were to make a prediction regarding this union, i wouldn't say that."], ["i think the marriage was made more for political reasons than for love.", "i think so too. but you'll see that the very thing that joins them will be the thing that separates them. octavia has a pious, chaste, meek disposition.", "doesn't everyone want a wife like that?", "not someone who doesn't share that disposition, meaning mark antony. he'll go back to his egyptian dish. then octavia's complaints will rouse caesar, and as i said before, the thing that brought them together will part them. antony will go where his passion is. he only married out of political necessity.", "then that's the way it may turn out. come on, sir, will you come aboard? i want to drink your health.", "i'll join you, sir. we did a lot of drinking in egypt.", "let's go."], ["here's where they'll end up, on the floor. some of them are leaning already. it won't take much for them to fall over.", "lepidus is red in the face.", "they made him drink the leftover wine usually given to the poor.", "their various personalities grate on one another. lepidus cries, \"no more arguing!\" and then when they agree he resigns himself to drink.", "which goes on to impede his judgment.", "that's what happens when you partner with great men but lack their power. i'd rather carry a reed that obviously can't protect me than a sword i cannot lift.", "to be so unimportant in the company of important men is like having a face without any eyes.", "this is how they do it, sir: they measure the depth of the nile, according to certain marks made on the walls of the pyramid. they know by those measurements if there will be famine or plenty. the higher the nile flows, the better the harvest. as the river ebbs, the farmer scatters his seeds on the remaining silt. the harvest comes shortly after that."], ["do you have unusual snakes there?", "yes, lepidus.", "the egyptian snake is born when the sun shines on the nile mud, just like the crocodile.", "yes, lepidus.", "let's have a seat and some wine. a toast to lepidus!", "i don't feel so well, but i won't stop.", "not until you pass out. i'm afraid you'll keep going until then.", "no, i certainly won't stop. i've heard that the pyramids build by the ptolemies are splendid. without doubt i've heard that.", "pompey, could i have a word with you?", "whisper it in my ear. what is it?", "please, captain, leave the feast and let me speak with you privately.", "leave me alone awhile. where's the wine for lepidus?", "what does a crocodile look like?", "sir, it's shaped like itself and is as wide as it has width. it is only as high as it is and moves with its own legs. it lives on what nourishes it, and when leave it, its soul moves into another body.", "what color is it?", "its own color."], ["it's a strange snake.", "it is that. and its tears are wet.", "will that description satisfy him?", "that last toast pompey gave him will take care of him, unless he's a raging glutton.", "go to hell, sir. are you still here? go away! do what i tell you. where's the wine i ordered?", "if any service i've done you deserves a favor, get up from your stool and speak with me.", "i think you're crazy!", "what is it?", "i've always had great respect for your destiny.", "you've served me faithfully. what else can i say? be happy, lords!", "stay away from the quicksand of drink, lepidus: you're sinking.", "would you like to be king of the entire world?", "what are you saying?", "would you like to be king of the entire world? now i've said it twice.", "how could that happen?", "just consider it. though i seem poor, i am the man who will give you the world."], ["are you drunk?", "no, pompey, i haven't had anything to drink. you can be the most powerful man on earth if you dare use your power. both land and sea are yours if you will take them.", "tell me how.", "the three who share the known world are aboard your boat. let me cut the anchor cable. when we are away from land, cut their throats. everything that belongs to them is yours.", "oh, you should have done it without telling me! for me to do such a thing would be dishonorable. for you to do it would be good service. you should know that to me, profit isn't more important than honor, but the other way around. regret that your mouth betrayed your actions. if you had acted without my knowledge, i would have approved your action later. but now i must condemn it. give it up and go drink.", "for this, i'll never be faithful to your declining fortunes again. a person who wants something but won't take it when it materializes won't get the opportunity again."], ["this toast is for lepidus!", "help lepidus ashore... i'll accept it for him, pompey.", "here's to you, menas.", "i accept with thanks, enobarbus.", "fill the cups until they run over.", "there goes a strong fellow, menas.", "why do you say that?", "he carries a third of the world. can't you see that?", "then a third of the world is drunk. i wish it were all drunk. then everything would go more smoothly.", "drink up. liven up the party.", "all right, then.", "this hasn't reached the level of an egyptian feast yet.", "it's getting there. clink your cups together in a toast! here's to caesar.", "i could do without another toast. it's unnatural. i keep washing my brain with alcohol, and it keeps getting fouler and more muddled.", "live in the moment.", "i'd prefer to seize the day. but i would rather abstain from everything for four days than drink so much in one."], ["ha! shall we dance egyptian , my noble emperor, and celebrate our wine?", "let's have one, good soldier.", "come, let's join our hands until the overpowering wine makes us soft and forgetful.", "everyone join hands. attack our ears with loud music, and i'll position you for the dance. then the boy will sing, and every man will sing the chorus at the top of his voice.", "come, you king of the vine, plump bacchus, with your pink eyes. our troubles are drowned in your vats. we'll crown ourselves with wreathes of grapes.", "give us cups until the world spins! give us cups until the world spins!", "how can you top that? good night, pompey. dear brother-in-law, let's leave together. this frivolity isn't appropriate to the serious purpose that brought us here. noble lords, let's say good night. we've all gotten red in the face. even the strong enobarbus isn't immune to the effects of wine, and i'm tongue-tied myself. this wild party has almost turned us all into clowns. what more need i say? good night. good antony, shake my hand."], ["we'll have a rematch at your feast on shore.", "yes, we will. let's shake on it.", "oh, antony, even if you've taken my father's house, what is that to me? we're friends! come, this way to the rowboat.", "be careful not to fall in.", "menas, i'm not going back on shore.", "no, come to my cabin. we'll have the musicians play drums, trumpets, flutes. what do you say? we'll make hear us bid a loud good night to these great men. play and be damned. play loud!", "hooray, i say. there's my hat!", "hooray! come on, noble captain."], ["now i've paid you back, parthia, and gotten revenge for marcus crassus' death. carry ' son at the front of our army, so all the parthians will know orodes, pacorus pays for marcus crassus!", "noble ventidius, while your sword is still warm with the blood of slain parthians, why not finish the job? the parthians retreat. go after them. chase them down if you have to track them through , or any other places they may go to hide. then our great general, antony, will commend you.", "oh, silius, silius, i've done enough. a subordinate may exceed his authority. you must understand, silius, that it's better to leave something undone than achieve too much fame in your superior's absence. caesar and antony have always achieved more by delegating authority to their officers than by leading their troops in person. sossius, an officer that held the same position in syria as i do here, achieved great distinction very quickly but lost antony's support as a result. a man who achieves more in war than his captain does becomes his captain's rival. ambition is a good quality in a soldier, but it proves detrimental rather than beneficial when used to surpass his superiors. i could do more to help antony, but to do so would insult him. and by insulting him, i would lose credit for the good i have done him already."], ["a soldier is just a tool, like his sword, unless he has your qualities, ventidius. are you going to write antony about this?", "i'll modestly tell him what i have done in his name that's the magical wording these days. i'll write how, under his flag and with his well-paid troops, we have beaten the formerly unvanquished parthia.", "where's antony now?", "he plans to go to athens. we must arrive there before him, as quickly as our baggage train will allow us. get a move on!"], ["did the brothers-in-law leave?", "they finished their business with pompey, and pompey has left. now the three triumvirs are putting their official seals on the treaty. octavia weeps at the thought of leaving rome. caesar is in a sober mood. and menas reports that lepidus has been hungover since pompey's party.", "", "he's a stylish man. and how he loves caesar!", "yes, but how he adores mark antony!", "caesar?", "then what's antony? a god of a god?", "are you talking about caesar? he's without equal!", "oh, antony! oh, you !", "if you want to praise caesar, just say his name that's all the praise that's necessary.", "he certainly flattered them both with extravagant compliments.", "he loves caesar best, but he also loves antony. oh! no one can describe or fathom lepidus' love for antony! hearts cannot think it, tongues cannot speak it, meas-urements cannot calculate it, scribes cannot write it, bards cannot sing it, and poets cannot make verses about it. but when it comes to caesar, lepidus' love approaches the awestruck wonder of a worshipper.", "he loves them both.", "they are his dung, and he their beetle."], ["so, there's the signal to ride. good-bye, noble agrippa.", "good luck, worthy soldier, and good-bye.", "you can't go any further with us, sir.", "you take an important part of myself with you. treat it well.... sister, be the kind of wife i hope you will be, and that this great contract rests upon your being... gracious antony, don't let my sister, this epitome of virtue that connects us, become the reason we separate. if you and i don't value her equally, it would be better for us to work out our differences without her.", "don't insult me with your distrust.", "i mean what i say.", "you won't find any cause for anxiety, even if you look for one. so, may the gods protect you and change the hearts of the romans so that they turn and give you their support. we'll leave you here."], ["good-bye, my dearest sister, good-bye. i hope you have good weather to set your mind at ease. farewell.", "my noble brother!", "her eyes are like april: full of showers. but they'll flower into love. be cheerful.", "take care of my former husband's property, and", "what is it, octavia?", "i'll tell you privately.", "she won't say what she's feeling, and she can't understand her feelings. she's balanced uneasily, like a feather on the swell of a great wave she won't move, even though her situation is about to change.", "do you think caesar will cry?", "he does look like it.", "if he were a horse, watery eyes would lower his value. men aren't supposed to cry, either.", "why, enobarbus, when antony saw that julius caesar was dead, he cried terribly. and he wept when he found that brutus had been killed at philippi."], ["he certainly did have rheumy eyes that year. whenever he had to kill, he cried it's true! until i cried too.", "don't worry, sweet octavia, i'll always write to you, and i'll think about you all the time.", "come here, sir. i'll wrestle with you out of love. see, now i have you.", "and thus i let you go and give you to the gods.", "good-bye. be happy.", "may every star light your path.", "farewell, farewell.", "farewell."], ["where is that messenger?", "he's afraid to come in.", "oh, come on. come here, sir.", "gracious queen, even herod of judea wouldn't dare look at you unless you were in a good mood.", "i'll have herod's head chopped off! but now that antony's gone, who will do it for me? come closer.", "most formidable queen!", "did you see octavia?", "yes, revered queen.", "where?", "in rome, madam. i saw her face as she walked with her brother and mark antony.", "is she as tall as i am?", "she is not, madam.", "did you hear her speak? is her voice pitched high or low?", "madam, i heard her speak. she has a low-pitched voice.", "that's not in her favor. he can't like her very long."], ["like her? oh, isis, that's impossible.", "you're right, charmian. she's both dull-spoken and dwarfishly little. did she carry herself with majesty? compare her to any memory you might have of royalty.", "she creeps along. moving or standing still, her bearing is about the same. she has a body, not a life. she's more like a statue than a living, breathing human being.", "is this true?", "if not, then i have no powers of observation.", "there aren't three people in all of egypt who could do better.", "he's very observant. i can tell. she doesn't have anything going for her so far. this messenger is wise.", "very wise.", "how old do you think she is?", "she was a widow previously, madam.", "a widow? do you hear that, charmian?", "and i think she's at least thirty.", "do you remember her face? was it long or round?", "round enough to be unattractive.", "usually that means a person is foolish. what color is her hair?"], ["brown, madam, and she wouldn't want her forehead to be any lower.", "here's gold for you. you mustn't hold my earlier outburst against me. i'll hire you again to go back to rome. i find that you're very good at this kind of work. go, prepare to travel. my letters are ready to go.", "he's an admirable man.", "he certainly is. i'm very sorry i was so hard on him. why, from what he says, octavia isn't worth getting upset over.", "not a bit, madam.", "this man's been around royalty. he should recognize it when he sees it.", "been around royalty! isis forbid it were otherwise, since he's been in your service so long.", "i want to ask him one more thing, charmian. but it's not important. bring him to my writing room. everything may still be all right.", "i assure you it is, madam."], ["no, no, octavia, it's not only that. that would be excusable that and a thousand other offenses like it. but caesar has gone and waged a new war against pompey. he hardly refers to me at all, though official decisions are supposed to be made jointly. when he can't avoid mentioning my services to the state, he minimizes them as much as possible. when situations arise when it would be natural to emphasize my due credit, he either ignores them or only pays me lip service.", "oh, dear husband, don't believe everything you hear or if you must believe it, don't let it all make you angry. no lady could be more miserable than i if you two disagree. i'll be left in the middle, praying for both sides. the good gods will laugh at me when on the one hand i pray for my husband and on the other for my brother. \"let my husband win!\" \"let my brother win!\" one prayer cancels out the other. there's no middle ground between these two extremes.", "gentle octavia, support the one that supports you. if i'm defeated, i lose my reputation. if i lose my reputation, i lose myself. it would be better for you to have no husband than a husband who lacks honor. however, as you requested, you may go and try to negotiate with your brother. in the meantime, i'll raise an army that will surpass his. go as soon as possible, so your prayers may be answered the sooner."], ["thank you, my lord. may the god of power make me, the weakest of the weak, your mediator. a war between you two would split the very world, and the bodies of your slaughtered soldiers would have to fill the chasm between.", "when you find out who started this disagreement, turn your anger upon them. our faults can't be so alike that you would judge us similarly. order supplies for your trip and choose your traveling companions. spend as much as you like."], ["how goes it, friend eros?", "some startling news has just arrived, sir.", "what news, man?", "caesar and lepidus declared war against pompey.", "that's old news. who's winning?", "caesar used lepidus in the war, but as soon as it was over, lepidus was expelled from the triumvirate. he wasn't allowed any of the glory of the victory, and he was accused of treasonous correspondence with pompey. on the basis of caesar's accusation alone, lepidus was imprisoned. so the weak third of the triumvirate is imprisoned until death frees him.", "so now the world will only be devoured by two sets of jaws caesar's and antony's. and even if you throw everything you possess to the two of them, they'll battle each other to the death to have it all. where's antony?", "he's walking in the garden, like this and he kicks the leaves on the path, exclaiming, \"lepidus, you fool!\"", "antony's grand navy is prepared.", "to sail to italy and caesar. another thing, domitius: antony wants to see you now. i should have waited to tell you my news."], ["it won't be that important. but never mind. take me to antony.", "come with me, sir."], ["in alexandria he condemned rome, and that's not all. this is what happened: he and cleopatra sat on chairs of gold on a silver-covered stage in the marketplace. and all their illegitimate children sat at their feet. antony confirmed her possession of egypt and made her absolute queen of lower syria, cyprus, and lydia.", "he did this in public?", "in the public arena, where they perform sporting events. he proclaimed his sons to be kings of kings. he gave media, parthia, and armenia to alexander. he gave syria, cilicia, and phoenicia to ptolemy. cleopatra was dressed like the goddess isis. they say she often attended her public functions like that.", "let's send this news to rome.", "the roman people are fed up with his arrogance already. they'll abandon him completely when they hear this."], ["the people have heard it already, and they've been told of his accusations.", "who does he accuse?", "he accuses me of withholding his share of sextus pompeius' possessions, which we seized in sicily. then he says i didn't return some ships he loaned me. finally, he criticizes the deposing of lepidus, and then goes on to accuse me of keeping all of lepidus' property for myself.", "sir, these accusations should be answered.", "it has been done already, and the messenger is on his way. i answered that lepidus had become too brutal and abused his position. for this he deserved to be deposed. as for what i seized in the wars, i granted that antony should have a share. but i also demanded my share of his acquisitions in armenia and the other conquered kingdoms.", "he'll never agree to that.", "then we won't agree to his demands.", "greetings, caesar, my lord! greetings, dearest caesar!", "oh, to think you've been rejected!"], ["you've never thought of me like that, and you have no reason to.", "then why did you travel so quietly? you didn't arrive like caesar's sister. antony's wife should have an army to escort her, with neighing horses to announce her arrival long before she appears. the trees along the road should have been filled with eager spectators. crowds should have been faint with excitement waiting to see you. the dust from your attending troops should have risen to heaven. but you've arrived like a common maid bringing goods to a roman market. you've kept me from displaying my love and when love is not shown, it's often not felt. i would have met you by sea and again by land. at each stage of your trip there would have been a more spectacular greeting.", "my good lord, i wasn't forced to travel like this. it was my choice. mark antony heard that you were preparing to wage war on him. when he gave me this news, i begged him to let me visit you.", "which he quickly allowed, given that you're an obstacle to his lust."], ["don't say that, my lord.", "i've kept track of him, and reports of his affairs arrive on every ship. where do you think he is now?", "he's in athens, my lord.", "no, he's not. you've been deceived. cleopatra summoned him. he's given his empire to a whore, and now they're gathering kings to wage a war. he's recruited bocchus, the king of libya; archelaus of cappadocia; philadelphos, king of paphlagonia; the thracian king, adallas; king manchus of arabia; the king of pont; herod, of judea; mithridates, king of comagen; polemon and amyntas, the kings of mede and lycaonia, and many more.", "oh, i'm heartbroken. i'm divided between two friends who are determined to kill each other.", "you're welcome here. i didn't write about breaking the alliance with antony until i saw you were being misled and realized how dangerous it would be to keep postponing preparations. cheer yourself. don't be troubled by the present situation, the obligations of which must ruin your happiness. don't worry about things that have already been decided by fate. welcome home to rome. nothing is more precious to me than you. you have been unbelievably abused, and now the gods make us the dispensers of justice. be comforted. you will always be welcome to me."], ["welcome, lady.", "welcome, dear madam. every heart in rome loves and pities you. only the adulterous and abominable antony abandons you, giving his power to a whore who turns that power against us.", "is that true, sir?", "it's undeniable. you are welcome here, sister. i beg you to continue to be patient. my dearest sister!"], ["i'll be straight with you. do not doubt it.", "but why, why, why?", "you opposed my taking part in the war. you said it wasn't proper.", "well, is it? is it?", "isn't this war against me? why shouldn't i be there in person?", "well, i could answer that if we went to war on male and female horses alike the male horses would be totally distracted and useless. the mares would be ridden by their riders and the male horses.", "what do you mean?", "antony will necessarily be distracted by your presence. you will affect his heart and his head. you'll take up time he can't afford to lose. he's already criticized for frivolous behavior. in rome they say that your eunuch photinus and your maids run the war.", "let rome fall! may the tongues of our critics rot! i have responsibilities in this war, and as the absolute ruler of my kingdom i will carry out my duties as if i were a man. don't argue against it. i won't stay behind."], ["no, i've had my say. here comes the emperor.", "isn't it strange, canidius, that he could cross the ionian sea so quickly from tarentum and brundusium and take toryne? have you heard about this, sweet?", "no one admires speed more than the lazy.", "that's a good reprimand, suitable for reminding even the best of men to guard against negligence. canidius, we'll fight him at sea.", "of course we'll fight him by sea. what else?", "why do you want to do that, my lord?", "because he's daring us to do it.", "so you've dared him to single combat.", "yes, and you dared caesar to fight the battle at pharsalia, where he fought against pompey. but caesar ignores offers that don't give him an advantage, and so should you.", "your ships are not well crewed. your sailors are mule drivers, harvesters men who were drafted quickly and have little training. caesar's fleet is manned by mariners who already have experience battling pompey. his ships are maneuverable. yours are slow and awkward. refusing to fight him at sea won't disgrace you. you've prepared for a land war."], ["i will fight by sea. by sea.", "most worthy sir, if you do that you throw away all the advantages you have on land. you will have to divide your army, which mostly consists of battle-hardened foot soldiers. you will be unable to use your legendary battle knowledge. you'll be abandoning proven methods that promise victory, and instead you'll put yourself at the mercy of haphazard chance.", "i'll fight at sea.", "i have sixty ships. caesar doesn't have any that are better.", "we'll burn our surplus ships and fully man the rest. we'll sail from actium and beat caesar as he approaches. even if we fail at that, we can still fight him on land.", "what's your business?", "the news is true, my lord. caesar has been seen. he has captured toryne.", "can caesar be there in person? no, that's impossible. it's strange enough that his army should be there. canidius, take our nineteen and twelve thousand horse soldiers. you must hold them on land. we'll go to our ship. come away, cleopatra."], ["what's the news, brave soldier?", "oh, don't fight by sea, noble emperor! don't trust rotten planks. don't you trust my sword and these wounds? let the egyptians and phoenicians go swimming. we are used to winning by standing on the earth and fighting toe to toe.", "well, well, let's go.", "by hercules, i think i'm right.", "soldier, you are. but antony's decisions aren't coming from his extensive experience. our leader is being led. we are following a woman.", "on land you keep the legions and cavalry together, don't you?", "marcus octavius, marcus justeius, publicola, and caelius will go by sea, but we'll keep the bulk on land. caesar's speed defies belief.", "while he was still in rome, he deployed his forces in so many different disguises that all our spies were fooled."], ["who's his lieutenant, do you know?", "a man named taurus, they say.", "i know the man well.", "the emperor is calling for canidius.", "the present time is like a woman in labor, each minute giving birth to some piece of news."], ["taurus!", "my lord?", "don't attack by land. keep the army together. don't provoke them to battle until we have finished at sea. don't exceed your orders as written here.", "our fate depends on this chance."], ["assemble our squadrons on the other side of the hill, in sight of caesar's navy. from there we'll be able to see how many ships he has and plan accordingly."], ["we're ruined, ruined, ruined! i can't watch any more. the egyptian flagship, the followed by all sixty egyptian ships, has turned and fled. it destroyed my eyes to look upon it.", "gods and goddesses the whole congregation of them!", "what's wrong with you?", "we have lost a major portion of the world through utter foolishness. we have kissed away entire kingdoms and provinces.", "how goes the battle?", "our side shows all the signs of certain defeat, which appear like the symptomatic sores of the plague. right in the middle of the fight, just when the battle could have gone either way actually we had a slight advantage that immoral egyptian nag may she die of leprosy! suddenly became frightened, and turned her ships around and fled.", "i saw that. the sight made me so sick i couldn't watch any more."], ["once she had turned around, the noble antony, ruined by love, hoisted his own sails and followed her like a lovesick duck. he left the battle at the most crucial point. i never saw such a shameful act. he betrayed his own experience, manhood, and honor.", "terrible. terrible.", "the battle on the sea is almost lost. if our general had been his old self, we would have won. oh, with his sordid desertion, he sets the example for our own.", "are you considering desertion, as well? then everything must really be finished.", "they fled toward peloponnesus.", "it's easy to get there. i'll go there and ascertain their next move.", "i'll yield my legions and cavalry to caesar. in this, i follow the examples of the six kings who have already surrendered."], ["i'll still follow antony, even though the odds are against him and good sense tells me i should go the other way."], ["listen. the earth tells me to stop walking upon it, as it's ashamed to carry me. friends, come here. i'm completely lost. i have a ship full of treasure. take that. divide it. escape and make peace with caesar.", "flee? not us.", "i have already fled from my true self. i've told cowards to turn their backs on me and run. friends, go. i've decided on a plan that doesn't require your assistance. leave. my treasure's in the harbor; take it. oh, i followed something i'm ashamed to look at now! even my hair revolts. the white hairs blame the brown hairs for being irresponsible, and the brown ones blame the white ones for being spineless and foolish. friends, go. i'll give you letters of introduction to some friends of mine who will help you. please, don't be sad, and don't tell me how reluctant you are. take your cues from my own despair. abandon the person that has abandoned himself. go to the harbor immediately! i'll give you the title to that ship and its treasure. just give me a moment, please only a moment. i've relinquished my authority, so please i'll see you all before long."], ["no, gentle madam, go. comfort him.", "yes, do, dearest queen.", "of course you must comfort him! what else?", "let me sit down. oh, !", "no, no, no, no, no.", "do you see her, sir?", "oh, damn, damn, damn!", "madam!", "madam, oh, good empress!", "sir... sir...", "yes, my lord, that's true. at philippi, caesar kept his sword in its sheath, like a dancer, while i commanded the armies that conquered cassius and brutus. caesar fought only through lieutenants. he had no experience with the brave contests of war. but now... never mind.", "ah, give us some privacy.", "the queen is here, my lord.", "go to him, madam, speak to him. he's not himself because he feels so ashamed."], ["well, then, help me.", "most noble sir, stand up. the queen is coming. she's weak and will die unless you comfort her.", "i've destroyed my reputation, a most shameful error.", "sir, here's the queen.", "oh, where have you led me, egypt? see how i hide my shame from you by turning around? i look behind me to see my past, destroyed by dishonor.", "oh, my lord, my lord, forgive my panic! i didn't think you would follow me.", "queen, you knew very well that my heart was tied to your ship and that you would pull me along with you. you knew that my spirit was completely under your control and that i would ignore the gods' orders in favor of yours.", "oh, forgive me!", "now i will have to send my humble proposal of peace to that young man. i've done as i pleased with half the world, making and losing fortunes, but now i negotiate from a position of weakness. you knew how far you had conquered my spirit. you knew that my sword, weakened by my love for you, would obey that love no matter what."], ["forgive me! forgive me!", "don't shed even one tear. one of your tears is worth everything that was won and lost. give me a kiss.", "this repays me. i sent our children's schoolmaster to caesar with our offer. has he returned? love, i am full of heaviness. servants, bring some wine and food! we have the most contempt for fortune when it goes against us."], ["let the envoy from antony come in. do you know him?", "it's antony's schoolmaster. by sending such an insignificant emissary, antony shows us how low he has sunk. not so long ago, he had so many royal supporters that he sent along extra kings as messengers.", "come forward and speak.", "humble as i am, i represent antony. until recently, i was as unimportant to his affairs as the morning dew is to the wide ocean.", "so be it. say what you're here for.", "he acknowledges that you are the master of his fate, and he requests to be allowed to live in egypt. if that is not granted, he reduces his requests and asks only that he be allowed to live as a private man in athens. that's all he asks for himself. cleopatra recognizes your greatness and accepts your authority. she only asks that the crown of egypt pass to her heirs, who are now at your mercy."], ["as for antony, i'm not interested in his requests. i'll give the queen a hearing and grant her requests if she either throws her dishonored friend out of egypt or kills him. then i'll listen to her. give my answer to them both.", "may good luck follow you!", "take him safely through the lines.", "now it's time to test your eloquence. on your way. separate cleopatra from antony. in my name, promise to fulfill her petitions. you can make up additional offers, if necessary. women aren't strong, even at their best. hardship will make even a abandon her vows. use your ingenuity, thidias. you can make your own conditions, which i will authorize as law.", "i go, caesar.", "observe how antony takes his defeat and how his attitude influences his actions.", "i will, caesar."], ["what are we going to do, enobarbus?", "think about our situation, then die.", "who is to blame for this: antony or i?", "only antony was at fault. he put his desire in charge of his reason. so what if you ran from the battle, terrified, as ranks of ships threatened one another? why should he have followed you? with half the world opposing the other half, it wasn't the time for antony, the pivotal player, to let love distract him. to race after your departing ships, leaving his navy to watch, was a shame as great as the resulting loss.", "please, let's not talk about it.", "is that his answer?", "yes, my lord.", "the queen will be treated fairly if she gives me up?", "that's what he says.", "tell her. if you send my aged head to that boy, caesar, he'll give you all the kingdoms you want."], ["your head, my lord?", "go back to him. tell him that his cheeks still bear the pink flush of youth, and that the world expects to see something remarkable from him. his treasure, his navy, and his armies might belong to a coward, and his ministers might be able to succeed just as well on behalf of a child as under the command of caesar. therefore, i dare him to lay aside his fancy trappings and meet this old man in single combat, sword against sword, just the two of us. i'll write the challenge. follow me.", "oh, that's likely! caesar, the great commander of troops, will surely risk all he has gained in order to fight this gladiator in the public square! i see that men's judgments are tied to their fortunes, and that external factors influence a man's internal qualities, making everything suffer. how could antony, knowing how luck stood on either side, still imagine that caesar would respond to his nonsense! caesar, you've conquered his judgment too.", "a messenger has arrived from caesar.", "with no more ceremony than that? see, ladies, how they scorn me now. they pinch their noses to avoid smelling the dying rose whose scent, as a bud, they happily inhaled. show him in, sir."], ["my integrity and i begin to contradict each other. being loyal to a fool makes loyalty foolish. but a person who can bear to keep his allegiance to a defeated lord defeats his lord's conqueror and earns a place in history.", "what does caesar want?", "it is for your ears only.", "there are only friends here. speak confidently.", "so they are possibly antony's friends.", "sir, he should have as many as caesar has. if he had that many friends, then he wouldn't need us. if caesar chose, antony would jump at the chance to be his friend. as for us, you know we are antony's, and he is caesar's.", "so be it. this, then, this is the message caesar sends to you, famous queen: he implores you not to be concerned about your situation. just remember that he is caesar.", "respectfully put. go on.", "he knows that you didn't embrace antony because you loved him, but because you feared him."], ["oh!", "so he regrets that any dishonorable acts were forced on you, not being performed of your own free will.", "he is like a god and knows the truth. my honor wasn't given; it was only dominated.", "i'll go get the truth of this from antony. sir, sir, are you so badly off that we must abandon you to your fate? even your dearest friend has abandoned you.", "shall i tell caesar what you request from him? he almost begs for the opportunity to help you. it would please him very much if you would rely on his wealth and success to support you. but he would feel even better if i could tell him that you had left antony and put yourself under his protection.", "what's your name?", "my name is thidias.", "most kind messenger, tell great caesar that through his deputy i kiss his conquering hand. tell him i am ready to lay my crown at his feet and kneel before him. tell him whose decrees are obeyed by the whole world that i will accept the fate he chooses for egypt."], ["that's your most dignified course of action. when confronted with the choice between a prudent action and a risky one, a wise man should dare to do only what he can practically accomplish if he follows this course, he will never be subjected to unpredictable chance. allow me to pay my respects by kissing your hand.", "when octavius caesar's father thought about conquering kingdoms, he rained kisses on my unworthy hand.", "promising favors? by jove that thunders! who are you, slave?", "a person who merely follows the orders of the best man, the man most worthy of service.", "you will be whipped.", "come here! ah, you bird of prey! now by all the gods and devils, my authority weakens. not long ago, when i cried, \"ho!\" kings would jump up and cry, \"what's your pleasure?\" are you deaf? i'm still antony."], ["take away this lout and whip him.", "it's safer to toy with a lion cub than an old, dying lion.", "by the moon and stars! whip him! if i saw twenty of the greatest powers that pay tribute to caesar taking such liberties with her hand what's her name now? this woman who once was cleopatra, but now has become something different? whip him, fellows, until he screws up his face like a baby and cries aloud for mercy! take him away.", "mark antony", "pull him away, and once he has been whipped, bring him back. caesar's knave will bring him a message for us.", "you were damaged goods before i met you. ha! did i desert my bed in rome, passing up the chance to have a legitimate family with a jewel of a woman, in order to be deceived by one who wastes her favors on servants?", "my good lord", "you've always been a liar. but when our vices become habits oh, the sadness of it! the wise gods blind us, shade our better judgment, make us love our mistakes, and laugh as we strut to our ruin."], ["oh, has it come to this?", "you were a cold crumb on dead julius caesar's plate when i met you. no, you were one of gneius pompey's leftovers not to mention your other, more depraved affairs, which have somehow managed to avoid becoming the subject of vulgar gossip. for i'm sure that although you may know what temperance is, you've never experienced it firsthand.", "why are you doing this?", "to let a servant be familiar with my little toy, your hand a hand that has signed royal treaties and pledged your love to me oh, if only i were standing on the hill of , so that i could roar louder than that horned herd! for i have been savagely abused, and to state my grievances politely would be as absurd as a condemned criminal thanking the hangman for doing his job quickly.", "has he been whipped?", "soundly, my lord.", "did he cry? did he beg my pardon?", "he did ask for mercy."], ["if your father is alive, let him be sorry you weren't born a daughter. and you should be sorry to follow caesar in his triumphal parade, since you have been whipped for following him. from now on, you should tremble and grow feverish whenever you see the white hand of a lady. get yourself back to caesar. tell him how you've been treated. be sure you tell him he makes me angry with him, because he seems proud and disdainful, harping on what i am now rather than what he knows. he makes me angry and that's easy to do right now, now that my lucky stars have abandoned me. if he doesn't like what i've said or done, remind him that he holds hipparchus, a slave i freed. he may whip, or hang, or torture him as he pleases. then we will be even. recommend that to him. take your whipping scars and go.", "are you done yet?", "you, my earthly moon, are now eclipsed, and that alone foretells my ruin."], ["i must wait for him to finish his tirade.", "in order to flatter caesar, would you flirt with the servant who laces up his pants?", "don't you know me still?", "has your heart cooled toward me?", "ah, dear, if that is true, let heaven make poisonous hail grow from my heart, and let the first hailstone drop down my throat. as it dissolves, so shall my life. the next hailstone should hit caesarion, until one by one all my children, and every one of my brave egyptians, are killed by the dissolving of this pellet storm and lie unburied, covered by gnats and flies.", "i am satisfied. caesar has made camp in alexandria. i will fight him there. our land forces have bravely stood firm. our tattered navy has reassembled and set sail, as formidable as the sea itself. where have you been, my bravery? do you hear what i say, lady? if i come back from the battlefield again to kiss those lips, i'll be covered in blood. my sword and i will earn our place in history. we still have hope."], ["that's my brave lord!", "i'll be triple the soldier i was in strength, bravery, and stamina. i'll fight brutally. in the days when i had better luck, prisoners of war could buy their freedoms from me with simple trinkets. but now i'll grit my teeth and kill anyone who tries to stop me. come, let's have one more extravagant night. invite all my sad captains. fill our wine bowls again. let's drink through midnight.", "it's my birthday. i had planned to celebrate it quietly, but since my lord is once more himself, i will be cleopatra again.", "we'll win yet.", "call all my lord's noble captains to him.", "do so. i'll speak to them, and then tonight i'll get them all so drunk that the wine seeps out of their old war wounds. come on, my queen. there's still life in our cause. the next time i fight, i'll make death love me. i'll compete even with his fatal scythe.", "now he'll work himself up to a fury. rage scares away a man's fear. in that state, a dove will attack an ostrich. i have always noticed that when my captain's reason is diminished, his bravery increases. when courage consumes reason, it destroys its only weapon. i'll look for some way to leave his service."], [], ["he calls me \"boy\" and scolds me as if he had the power to whip me out of egypt. he whipped my messenger with rods. he dares me to personal combat, caesar against antony. let the old ruffian discover that i have many other ways to die, and in the meantime, we'll laugh at his challenge.", "caesar must realize that when a man as powerful as antony begins to rage, he has been pursued to the point of collapse. don't give him time to catch his breath. take advantage of his unreasonable rage. anger does not protect the angry well.", "tell our top commanders that i want tomorrow's battle to be the last we fight. our army has recently acquired many of mark antony's former soldiers enough to capture him. see that it is done, and prepare a feast for the soldiers. we have enough supplies for it, and they've earned it. poor antony!"], ["he won't fight with me, domitius?", "no.", "why won't he?", "he thinks that since his fortune is twenty times better than yours, it would be like pitting twenty men against one.", "tomorrow, soldier, i'll fight by sea and land. by the end i will either live, or else i'll restore my honor by shedding my blood. will you fight well?", "when i strike, i'll cry, \"all or nothing!\"", "well put. come on. call out my household servants.", "tonight let's have plenty to eat.", "give me your hand; you've been truly honest so have you and you and you you too. you have all served me well, and kings are your peers.", "what is this?", "it's one of those nostalgic moods caused by sorrow."], ["and you're honest too. i wish i could split into as many men as there are servants here before me, and that all of you could merge into a single antony, so i could give you the same good service you've given me.", "the gods forbid!", "well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight. keep my cups full and treat me as you did when my empire was one of your fellow servants, obeying my commands.", "why is he doing this?", "he wants to make his followers weep.", "wait on me tonight. it's possible that this will be the end of your service. it's possible you won't see me again, or if you do, it will only be my mangled body. perhaps tomorrow you'll be serving another master. i look upon you as a person saying good-bye. my honest friends, i won't turn you away, but like a master dependent on your good service, i will stay with you until death separates us. serve me tonight for two hours i don't ask any more and may the gods bless you for it.", "what are you doing, sir? you're making them uncomfortable. look they're crying. and i'm just foolish enough to tear up myself. it's embarrassing. don't turn us into women."], ["ha, ha, ha! may the evil one take me if i meant it like that! those tears will bring blessings to you. you interpret my words in a melancholy sense, my hearty friends. i spoke to encourage you, asking that you help me make this night a brilliant one. you should know, my friends, that i have good hopes for tomorrow, and that i will lead you as if i expect victory rather than an honorable death. let's go to supper. come, and let's drown our worries."], ["good night, brother. tomorrow is the day.", "this battle will determine who wins the war. take care of yourself. have you heard about anything unusual happening in the city?", "no. what was it?", "it was probably just a rumor. good night.", "well sir, good night.", "soldiers, watch carefully.", "you too. good night. good night.", "this is our station. and if our navy wins tomorrow, no doubt our army will do their part.", "it's an outstanding army and highly motivated.", "quiet! what's that sound?", "listen! listen!", "listen!", "there's music coming out of thin air.", "from under the earth.", "it's a lucky sign, isn't it?", "no."], ["quiet, i say. what does this mean?", "it means that , is leaving him.", "let's walk over and see if the other soldiers heard the same thing.", "hello there, good sirs.", "what now? what now? do you hear that?", "yes. isn't it strange?", "do you hear that, men? do you?", "let's follow the music as far as we can without leaving our station and see if it stops.", "good idea. it's very strange."], ["eros! bring my armor, eros.", "get a little sleep.", "no, my dear... eros, come on, bring my armor, eros.", "come on, good fellow, help me into that armor you're carrying. if luck deserts us today, it's because we defy it. come on.", "no, i'll help too. what's this part for?", "ah, leave it alone. leave it alone! you armor my heart. no! no! that part goes there.", "really, i'll help. it must go like this.", "yes, well done. we've got it now. do you see this, my good fellow? go and put on your own armor.", "in a minute, sir.", "didn't i buckle this well?", "excellently, excellently. anyone who unbuckles this before i want to take it off to rest will be sorry. you're fumbling, eros. my queen's a better squire than you are. hurry. oh, love, if you could only watch the battle today and see how expert i am at my craft."], ["good morning to you. welcome. you look like a person who knows the business of war. when we love our job we get up early and go to it joyfully.", "even though it's early, there are already a thousand armored soldiers waiting for you at the harbor.", "the weather is fair. good morning, general.", "good morning, general.", "that was a fine fanfare, boys. like a young man who wants to amount to something, this morning begins early. so, so. here, give me that. this is how it goes on. well done. farewell, lady.", "whatever happens to me, this is a soldier's kiss. it would be shameful to draw out our good-byes. i'll leave you without revealing any emotion, like a man of steel. anyone who wants to fight, follow me now, and i'll see you get your wish. good-bye."], ["if it pleases you, let's go to your room.", "lead the way. he goes forth to war bravely. if only he and caesar could determine the outcome of this war by single combat! then antony would but, with circumstances as they are well, let's go."], ["may the gods bless antony today!", "i wish you and your scarred self had convinced me to wage our last battle on land.", "if you had, the kings that have revolted and the soldier that deserted this morning would still be behind you.", "who deserted this morning?", "you don't know? someone who was always near you. if you call for enobarbus, he won't hear you. or if he can hear you from caesar's camp, he'll reply, \"i'm no longer on your side.\"", "what are you saying?", "sir, he's with caesar.", "sir, he left his belongings and treasure.", "he's gone?", "it's certain.", "eros, send his treasure to him. do it now. don't keep anything back, i insist. write to him from me i'll sign it sending greetings and gentle good-byes. say that i hope he never has cause to look for a new master. oh, my bad luck has forced honest men to become traitors. hurry. enobarbus!"], [], ["agrippa, go start the battle. we want antony taken alive. make sure everyone knows that.", "i will, caesar.", "an era of universal peace is about to start. if this battle goes well for us, there will be peace in all .", "antony has come onto the battlefield.", "go order agrippa to put the men who deserted antony's army at the front. that way antony will feel like he's fighting his own men.", "alexas deserted. he went to judea as if on antony's business, but he persuaded herod to support caesar instead. caesar hanged him for this service. canidius and the others that left antony are given hospitality here but no positions of trust. i've done a bad thing, for which i will blame myself so much that i'll never be happy again."], ["enobarbus, antony has sent you all your treasure, with generous gifts besides. the messenger arrived on my watch and is unloading his mules at your tent.", "it's yours.", "don't joke about this, enobarbus. i'm telling you the truth. you'd better bring the messenger safely through the lines so he can return. i'd do it myself, but i can't leave my post. your emperor is still a king among gods.", "i am the worst person alive, and i know it the best. oh, antony, you extravagantly generous man, how would you have rewarded me for serving you faithfully when you reward my badness with all of this gold! my heart feels like it's about to explode. if grief doesn't kill me, i'll find a quicker way to kill myself even though i think grief will do the job just as well. i, fight against you, antony? no, i'll go find some ditch to die in. the foulest fate would be most appropriate for me now in this latest phase of my life."], [], ["retreat! we've advanced too far. caesar himself is in trouble and there are more adversaries than we expected.", "oh, my brave emperor, this is what i call a fight! if we'd fought like this before, we'd have driven them home with bandaged heads.", "you're bleeding a lot.", "i had a scar here that looked like a \"t\"; now it's an \"h.\"", "they're retreating.", "we'll chase 'em into their latrines. i still have room for six more wounds.", "they're retreating, sir, and our superiority indicates a clear victory.", "let's slash their backs and grab 'em like we do rabbits, from behind. it's fair game to mark a coward.", "i'll reward you once for your cheerfulness and ten times for your courage. come on."], ["i'll limp after you."], ["we've driven him all the way back to his camp. one of you run to the queen with the news.", "before sunrise tomorrow, we'll kill anyone who escaped today. i want to thank all of you. you're formidable. you fought not as if you served the cause but as though it were as much your personal fight as mine. you are all . go on into the city. embrace your wives and your friends. describe your feats for them while they cry for joy. their tears will wash the congealed blood from your wounds, and they will kiss those honorable cuts until they heal.", "give me your hand. i'll praise your actions to this powerful enchantress so that she will thank you with blessings. oh, light of the world, wrap your arms around my armored neck. leap, with all your finery through my armor and go straight to my heart. there you can ride upon my heartbeats, sharing in my triumph.", "lord of lords! your courage is infinite. have you returned smiling from the great battle for the world?"], ["my songbird, we have beaten them to their beds. what do you think, girl! even though there are some gray hairs among the brown, i still have a brain and muscles that will let me compete with younger men. look at this man. show him favor by letting him kiss your hand. kiss it, my warrior.", "today he fought as though he were a god who hated mankind.", "friend, i'll give you armor made of gold. it belonged to a king.", "he deserves it, even if it were covered with jewels like holy . give me your hand. let's have a cheerful march through alexandria, proudly carrying our dented shields. if we had enough room in the palace to house this army, we'd all eat together and toast tomorrow, which promises to be full of danger. trumpeters, blast the city's ears. mix your fanfares with our drums, so that sounds from both heaven and earth will herald our approach."], [], ["if we aren't relieved in an hour, we have to return to our barracks. the night is bright, and they say we'll be forming for battle by two a.m.", "that last day was a hard one for us.", "oh, listen to me, night", "who is this?", "stay hidden and listen.", "be my witness, oh you blessed moon. the men who revolted against antony will be remembered scornfully in the history books. but poor enobarbus repented.", "that's enobarbus?", "quiet! keep listening.", "oh, moon, you queen of sadness, drop poisonous dew on me so that my life, which continues against my wishes, will end. take my heart and throw it against my hard, stony sin. my heart, which dried out with grief, will surely break apart into a powder, and that will be the end of my disgusting mind. oh, antony! you are more noble than my revolt is dishonorable. forgive my crimes against you, but let history record me as a fugitive traitor. oh, antony! oh, antony!"], ["let's speak to him.", "let's listen to him. he may say something concerning caesar.", "good idea. but he's sleeping.", "it looks more like he fainted. no one ever gave a prayer like that before going to sleep.", "let's go to him.", "wake up, sir, wake up. speak to us.", "do you hear us, sir?", "the hand of death has taken him.", "listen. the drums softly wake the sleepers. let's carry him to the barracks. he's an important person. our hour is up.", "come on, then. he may recover yet."], ["they've switched their operation to the sea today. we didn't please them on land.", "we're ready for both, my lord.", "i wish they'd fight in fire or in the air. we'd meet them there too. but here's the plan: our army will stay with us on the hills by the city. orders have been given to the navy and they've left port. we'll be able to analyze and direct the battle better from the hills."], ["we won't move our land forces unless we're attacked. and i doubt that will happen, since most of antony's men are with his navy. let's take up the best positions we can in the valleys."], ["they still haven't joined the battle. i'll be able to see better from that pine tree over there. i'll let you know right away how it's going.", "swallows have built nests in cleopatra's sails. the fortunetellers won't say whether that's a good sign or a bad one, but they don't look happy. antony is valiant and dejected. his mood changes by fits and starts; his checkered luck vacillates between hope and fear, winning and losing.", "all is lost! this treacherous egyptian has betrayed me. my fleet has surrendered to the enemy. you can see them over there throwing their hats up in the air and drinking together like long lost friends. three-time traitor and whore! it's you who have sold me to this youth, caesar. now my war is only with you. tell the army to flee. revenge on cleopatra will be my last act. order them to escape. go!"], ["oh, sun, i will never see another one of your sunrises. luck and antony separate here and now. here we'll shake hands good-bye. is it all come to this? the brave men who followed me like little dogs, whom i rewarded, have left me to follow caesar. i've been stripped of everything, betrayed. oh, that devious egyptian spirit! her charms launched my wars and called them back again. pleasing her was my main goal, and she lured me to total defeat. where are you, eros! eros!", "ah, you sorceress! be gone!", "why is my lord enraged against his love?", "get out of my sight, or i'll give you what you deserve and spoil caesar's victory. let him hoist you up in front of the shouting crowds! follow his chariot, like the greatest disgrace to your whole gender. let them exhibit you to the public for meager coins, like a monstrosity. then let octavia dig up your face with her nails."], ["if you wish to live, you had better get out of here. but i think it would have been better if you'd let me kill you. one death would have prevented the deaths of many others. eros, ho! hercules, my ancestor, teach me how to feel your rage. i'll toss lichas to the moon and use my mighty hands to kill my better self. the witch shall die. she sold me to that young roman boy and now i'm ruined. she'll die for it. eros, ho!"], ["help me, ladies! oh, antony is more furious than telamon, who killed himself in a jealous rage. the wild boar of thessaly, which the goddess diana sent to punish king caledon for neglecting her sacrifices, didn't foam at the mouth as much as antony does now.", "go to your tomb! lock yourself in and send him word that you're dead. when a great person departs, it causes more pain than when the soul leaves the body.", "to my tomb! mardian, go tell him i've killed myself. say the last word i spoke was \"antony,\" and please word it pathetically. go, mardian, and let me know how he reacts to my death. to the tomb!"], ["eros, can you still see me?", "yes, noble lord.", "sometimes we see a cloud that looks like a dragon. sometimes there's a cloud like a bear or a lion, a castle, a floating rock, a craggy mountain. or it might look like a blue cliff with trees on it that bow to the ground. these things fool our eyes by seeming solid, when they are actually only air. you've seen these illusions. they're spectacles that appear at sunset.", "yes, my lord.", "what looks like a horse is quick as thought disfigured by the wind, made as difficult to distinguish as water poured into water.", "that's true, my lord.", "eros, my young friend, your captain is now just like that cloud. here and now i seem like antony, but i can't keep myself in this form, my boy. i went to war to save cleopatra, whose love i thought i had, since she had mine and mine carried with it a million others, those of my soldiers, now lost. the queen conspired with caesar to undermine my success and assure his victory. no, don't cry, kind eros. we still have the option of killing ourselves."], ["oh, your contemptible lady! she has disarmed me.", "no, antony. my mistress loved you, and her destiny was completely joined with yours.", "get out, insolent eunuch! silence! she has betrayed me and shall die.", "a person can only pay with their life once, and she has paid in full. what you wanted is yours. her last words were \"antony! most noble antony!\" then, as she was speaking your name, a strangled groan split her words. \"antony\" was divided between her heart and lips. she gave up her life with your name still within her.", "is she dead, then?", "dead.", "remove your armor, eros. the long day's work is over, and it is time to sleep. permission to leave unharmed is abundant payment for your news. go!", "off! take off my armor. not even ajax's famous shield, made of seven layers of oxhide and covered in bronze, could protect my heart from this attack. oh, chest, obey me! heart, for once be stronger than all the rest of the body combined. break out of my ribcage! faster, eros, faster. i won't be a soldier anymore. battered armor, be off. you were worn with honor. leave me awhile."], ["i will catch up with you, cleopatra, and weep for your forgiveness. it's the only way left, because now any extension of my life would be torture. since the light of my life has gone out, i'll stop here. now any effort ruins what it attempts. yes, even power gets in its own way. end it, then, and everything is over. eros! i'm coming, my queen! eros! wait for me. in the place where souls recline on beds of flowers we'll walk hand in hand and amaze the other ghosts with our spirited demeanor. those famous lovers, dido and aeneas, will lose their admirers, and the whole place will be devoted to us. come, eros. eros!", "what can i do for my lord?", "since cleopatra died, i have lived in such dishonor that the gods despise my disgrace. though i have made conquests throughout the four corners of the world and sailed with fleets so large they looked like floating cities, i don't have as much courage as a woman. i have less nobility than the lady who, by killing herself, says to caesar, \"only cleopatra can defeat cleopatra.\" you promised me, eros, that should the ultimate moment arrive which it has when dishonor and disgust are inevitable, that upon my command, you would kill me. do it. this is that time. you won't be striking me down, but defeating caesar. call up your courage."], ["the gods forbid! can i do what all the parthian arrows, though shot by enemies, could not?", "eros, would you like to look through a window in rome and watch your master marching in caesar's victory parade, his arms crossed and tied, his head bowed in submission, his face red from shame, while the chariot of triumphant caesar precedes him, putting the final stamp to his humiliation?", "i would not.", "then come on. i must be restored to health by an injury. draw your trustworthy sword, which you have used in such service to your country.", "oh, sir, pardon me!", "when i freed you from slavery, didn't you swear to do this when i asked you? do it immediately, or all your previous services to me were accidental, without purpose. take out your sword and come on.", "then turn your noble face away from me, that face that the whole world adores.", "look!"], ["i have drawn my sword.", "now let it carry out its purpose immediately.", "my dear master, my captain, my sovereign, let me say before i strike this fatal blow: farewell.", "you've said it, friend, and farewell to you.", "good-bye, great commander. should i do it now?", "now, eros.", "well, then, there!", "with this i avoid the grief of antony's death.", "brave eros, three times more honorable than i am! you teach me what i should do but could not. my queen and eros have by their brave examples beaten me to the history books. but i will embrace death as a bridegroom does his bride, and rush to it as to a lover's bed. come then. eros, your master dies your student. i learned to do this from you."], ["what! i'm not dead? not dead? guard, here! oh, kill me!", "what's the trouble?", "i've botched the job, friends. oh, finish what i've begun.", "our guiding light is out.", "and time itself is ended.", "sadness and despair!", "whoever's a real friend should strike me dead.", "not me.", "me neither.", "none of us.", "your death and destiny advise your followers to escape.", "i only need to show your sword to caesar and tell him about your death to get into his good favor.", "where's antony?", "there, diomedes, there.", "is he still alive? why don't you answer me, man?"], ["is that you, diomedes? draw your sword and give me enough blows to kill me.", "most powerful lord, my mistress cleopatra sent me to you.", "when did she send you?", "just now, my lord.", "where is she?", "locked in her tomb. she had a premonition of what has actually happened. she saw that you suspected her of negotiating a treaty with caesar which never will be true. afraid that your anger would not subside, she sent you word she was dead. but later, fearing how that news might affect you, she sent me to tell you the truth. i'm afraid i've come too late.", "too late, good diomedes. call my guard, please.", "hey out there! emperor's guards! guards, hey! come! your lord calls for you!", "carry me, good friends, to where cleopatra is. it's the last command i shall ever give you.", "we're very sorry, sir, that you may not live to wear us out with your commands."], ["it's a very sad day.", "no, my friends, don't please fate by giving it your sorrow as well. if we welcome our punishment, we punish it right back by seeming to take it lightly. pick me up. i have often led you, now you must carry me, my good friends and take my thanks for everything."], ["oh, charmian, i will never leave this tomb!", "be calm, dear lady.", "no, i won't. strange and terrible events are all welcome, but i despise comforts. the size of my sorrow must be as great as its source.", "what's the news! is he dead?", "he is close to death, but not dead yet. look out the other window; his guard has brought him here.", "oh, sun, burn up the orbit in which you move, so that the world may be dark forever! oh, antony, antony, antony! help, charmian, help, iras, help! help, friends below; lift him up here.", "be calm! it was not caesar's bravery that conquered antony but antony's that has triumphed over himself.", "that's the way it should be only antony should conquer antony. but how terrible that it has happened!"], ["i am dying, cleopatra, dying. i just beg death to wait awhile, until i place the last of our many thousands of kisses on your lips.", "i don't dare come down forgive me, my lord i don't dare, for fear of capture. i will never be exhibited as lucky caesar's prize. if knives, poison, or snakes have edge, effect, or venom, i am safe from that fate. your wife octavia, with her self-effacing eyes and self-righteous assumptions, won't get any praise from patronizing me. but come. come up here, antony help me, ladies we must carry you up. help us, good friends.", "oh, quick, before i'm gone.", "such exercise! my lord is so heavy! our strength has all turned into sadness. that's what makes the weight. if i had the goddess juno's power, i would make the strong-winged messenger, mercury, pick you up and seat you beside jove. up just a little more wishes are always foolish oh, come on, come on, come on!"], ["and welcome, welcome! die where you have lived, in my arms. let me revive you with my kisses. if my lips had the power to give life, i would wear them out like this.", "what a sad sight!", "i am dying, cleopatra, dying. give me some wine and let me say a few words.", "no, let me talk, and let me scold to the heavens, so that", "one thing, dear queen: request honor, as well as safety, from caesar. oh!", "honor and safety do not go together.", "dear, listen to me: don't trust any of caesar's men besides proculeius.", "i'll trust my determination and my hands, but none of caesar's men.", "don't mourn over this unhappy reversal of fortune at the end of my life. remember my earlier lot, when i lived as the greatest, most noble prince in the world. i'm not dying shamefully, doffing my helmet to my countryman like a coward, but as a roman, honorably conquered by another roman. now i feel my soul leaving. i can't speak any more."], ["most noble man, will you die? don't you care about me? shall i stay in this dreary world, which is no better than a pigsty without you? oh, look, ladies. the best of the world disappears. my lord!", "oh, the glory of war has faded. the flags have fallen. young boys and girls are equal to men. there is nothing distinctive, nothing remarkable left in the world.", "oh, stay calm, lady!", "our queen is dead too.", "lady!", "madam!", "oh, madam, madam, madam!", "royal egypt, empress!", "quiet, quiet, iras.", "now i am no more than a woman, ruled by the same lowly passion as the maid who milks and does the humblest chores. i might now hurl my scepter at the destructive gods and tell them that this earthly world was as good as their heavenly one, until they stole away its jewel, antony. now all is for nothing. patience is foolish. impatience suits a mad dog. so why should it be a sin to rush toward death, to seek it out in its hiding place before it dares to come to find me? how are you, my ladies? tell me! cheer up! how are you, charmian? my gallant girls! ah, ladies, look: the light of our lives has gone out. good noble ladies, be brave. we'll bury him, and then we'll commit acts as brave and fine as any romans, and make death proud to take us. come on, you can go. the container of that great soul is now cold. ah, ladies, ladies! let's go. we have no friends but determination and the quickest death."], [], ["dolabella, go see antony. tell him to surrender. his position is hopeless. this delay makes him look ridiculous.", "right away, caesar.", "what are you doing with a sword? who do you think you are coming in here armed?", "my name is decretus. i served mark antony, who was the commander most worthy of my services. while he was alive, i lived only to serve him and oppose his enemies. if you accept my service, i'll serve you the same way. if not, you can kill me.", "what are you saying?", "caesar, i'm telling you that antony is dead.", "when such a great man dies there should be a thunderclap. the fractured world, in its confusion, should send lions into the city streets and humans into the wilderness to live in lions' dens. this isn't the death of one man. it's the death of half the world."], ["he's dead, caesar. not by public execution or an assassin's knife. he killed himself with the same hand that performed such brave acts. with the courage his heart lent his hand, his hand in turn split his heart. this is his sword. i pulled it from his wound. look his noble blood is still on it.", "listen, sad friends, though the gods may rebuke me, this news would make kings cry.", "it's strange that human nature makes us grieve for the very thing we've been trying to achieve.", "his faults were equally matched by his virtues.", "there was never a ruler as excellent as he. but gods, you give us faults so we'll be human. caesar is upset.", "it's impossible for him not to see himself in antony.", "oh, antony. i drove you to this. but we have to get rid of a disease if it threatens our body. either i had to ruin you, or you would have ruined me. there wasn't enough room in the world for both of us. even so, let me mourn, with tears that heal like a bloodletting, that you my brother, my greatest competitor, my partner in rule, my friend and companion on the battlefield, the very arm of my body, and the heart in which mine own heart's thoughts lived that our fates could not be reconciled, which caused us to divide ourselves from one another. let me tell you, friends"], ["i'll tell you at a better time. this man looks like his business is urgent. let's hear what he has to say. who are you?", "a poor egyptian, but my mistress, the queen, sent me to find out what your intentions are concerning her. she's locked up in her tomb and wants to prepare herself for her fate.", "tell her to put her mind at rest. she'll find out soon enough by one of our messengers how respectfully and kindly we plan to treat her. i cannot be taught how to be cruel.", "may the gods bless you.", "come here, proculeius. tell her we mean her no disrespect. give her whatever assurances you feel she needs to keep her from killing herself. i need her alive, so that i can exhibit her in my triumphal procession and gain eternal fame. go, and hurry back to bring us her reply and news of her state of mind."], ["i will, caesar.", "gallus, you go with him.", "where's dolabella? he's supposed to support proculeius.", "dolabella!", "never mind. i remember he's already occupied. he'll be done in time. come with me. in my tent i'll show you how unwillingly i was drawn into this war. you'll see how calm and gentle my letters to antony always were. come and see the proof."], ["being alone has helped me better understand my life. it's pathetic to be caesar. he can't be fortune; he's only fortune's errand boy. it would be a great deed to commit suicide that act which ends all other things, which makes all accidents and changes stop. which causes you to sleep, and takes you away from earthly concerns.", "caesar greets the queen of egypt and asks that you consider what you will ask from him.", "what's your name?", "my name is proculeius.", "antony told me about you. he said you were a man i could trust. but i don't worry about being deceived because i don't need to trust. if your master wants a queen to beg from him, you should tell him that a queen will beg for no less than a kingdom. if he will grant me conquered egypt, so that i may give it to my son, i will kneel to him with thanks."], ["be content. you're in the charge of an honorable man. don't be afraid. you can ask for anything from my lord. his generosity flows to anyone in need. if i can tell him that you have submitted to him sweetly, he'll request your assistance in finding ways in which he can support you.", "please tell him i have surrendered to his fortune. i give up to him the glory he has won. i'm learning every hour how to be subservient. i'd be happy to meet with him in person.", "i'll tell him all of this, dear lady. be at ease. i know he's sorry for your situation, especially since he caused it.", "see how easy it was to capture her? guard her until caesar arrives.", "your majesty!", "oh, cleopatra! you've been betrayed, my queen!", "quick, quick good hands!"], ["stop, brave lady, stop! don't do such a shameful thing to yourself. we've rescued you from yourself. we have not betrayed you.", "what, am i being denied death, as well? the thing which even dogs are given, to rid them of their suffering?", "don't insult my master's generosity by killing yourself. the world will see how noble he is by the way he treats you. your death would prevent that.", "where are you, death? come here. come, and you can have a queen. one queen is worth more than a whole number of babies and beggars, your cheapest conquests.", "oh, control yourself, lady!", "sir, i won't eat. i won't drink. and don't expect me to talk. i won't sleep either. i'll destroy my body. let caesar do whatever he wants. you'd better understand that i won't wait till i'm chained up in your master's court, and i won't let myself be scolded even once by dull octavia. shall i let them exhibit me to the shouting mobs of rome? i'd rather die in a ditch in egypt, and make it my gentle grave. i'd rather lie in the nile mud with flies laying their eggs in me, making me disgusting. i'd rather be hung in chains from one of our pyramids!"], ["you're letting yourself get carried away with these horrible thoughts. you'll see that caesar is giving you no reason to do so.", "proculeius, caesar has heard about what you've done here and has sent for you. i'll take the queen into my custody.", "so be it, dolabella. caesar's thanks are my greatest reward. be kind to her. i'll relay to caesar any request you want to give me.", "tell him i'd like to die.", "have you heard of me, most noble empress?", "i don't remember.", "i'm sure you've heard of me.", "it doesn't matter what i've heard or known. you must be the one who laughs when boys or women tell you their dreams. isn't that your habit?", "i don't know what you mean, madam.", "i dreamed about an emperor called antony. oh, i wish i could sleep again, so i could have another dream like that!"], ["if you'd like", "authority radiated from his face, and his presence brought knowledge and order to the people of earth.", "your majesty", "his power extended from one shore to the other, as if he straddled the ocean with his legs. when he raised his arm in command, the world trembled. he spoke exquisitely to his friends, but when he wanted to terrify the world, his voice was like thunder. there was no end to his generosity. the more he gave, the more he wanted to give. his amusements showed another side of him, one detached from his world of responsibility and duty. kings and noblemen served him. kingdoms and provinces dropped from his pockets like loose change.", "cleopatra", "do you think there ever was, or could there ever be, a man such as the one i dreamed about?", "no, gentle madam.", "the gods can hear you lying! but if there ever were such a man, simple dreams could never contain his greatness. when it comes to creating fantastical things, the natural world cannot compete with imagination. and yet, if the natural world could create something like antony, it would have a masterpiece to rival anything fantasy might construct. antony would easily outshine all imaginary beings."], ["listen to me, madam. you are a remarkable person and your loss is equally remarkable. you are responding appropriately to the greatness of that loss. i hope i never achieve success if i don't feel some of your heartbroken grief right now.", "thank you, sir. do you know what caesar intends to do with me?", "i'm reluctant to tell you what i wish you knew.", "please, sir", "though he is honorable", "he'll still parade me through rome as a trophy of war.", "i know he will, madam.", "stand aside for caesar.", "which of these ladies is the queen of egypt?", "it's the emperor, madam.", "arise. you need not kneel to me. please rise, queen.", "the gods have ordained it to be like this, sir. you are my lord and master. i must obey."], ["don't think i blame you. whatever injuries i received in the war, i put down to the fortunes of war.", "you are now the sole lord of the entire world. i can't explain my cause very clearly. i must admit to having the weaknesses that all women are accused of.", "cleopatra, understand that, rather than emphasize our power over you, we will soften if you accept our intentions, which are very compassionate toward you. your acceptance will benefit you, but if you try to make me look cruel by committing suicide as antony did, i won't be so generous. your children will be destroyed, a fate your submission will save them from. i'll leave you now.", "you may do whatever you want in the world. it's yours, and you may hang us, your trophies of war, anywhere you like. here, my good lord."], ["you shall advise me in everything having to do with cleopatra.", "this is the inventory of the money, silverware, dishes, and jewels that are still in my possession. it's an exact list. not even trivial things were left out. where's seleucus?", "here, madam.", "this is my treasurer. my lord, he will swear on his life that i haven't kept a thing. tell the truth, seleucus.", "madam, i'd rather sew my lips shut than tell a lie when my life depends upon it.", "what did i keep for myself?", "enough to buy everything you have declared.", "no, don't be ashamed, cleopatra. you're very prudent to set a little aside.", "look around you, caesar. oh, just see what happens after the pageantry is over! what is mine will be yours now. if we were to change places, what is yours would be mine. seleucus' ingratitude makes me wild. oh, you slave! i can't trust you any more than a prostitute. what are you doing? cringing away? i'll give you a good reason to cringe, i promise you. i'll scratch out your eyes, even if they could fly. you slave! soulless villain! dog! oh, that was unbelievably low!"], ["good queen, let me implore you", "oh, caesar, i am so ashamed. you condescended to visit me here, honoring my humble self with your lordly presence. and one of my own servants increases my disgrace by adding his envy! suppose, good caesar, that i have saved a few feminine trifles, some unimportant trinkets. these have worth only as gifts to friends. and suppose i have kept a few more expensive gifts aside for and octavia, to solicit their good wishes. must i then be exposed by a person i've supported? by the gods! it adds another blow to the many i have already. please leave, or i'll show you what's left of my spirit since my fortune was ruined. if you were a real man, you would have had mercy on me.", "leave, seleucus.", "you should also know that as head of state, we are often blamed for the crimes of others. and though we may fall, we are still responsible for their offenses. i am therefore to be pitied."], ["cleopatra, our conquest won't include either the things you kept back or the ones you listed. it's all still yours. do whatever you like with it. you can trust that caesar is not a merchant to haggle with you over your property. so cheer up. don't be captured by your depressed thoughts. no, dear queen. we want to follow your own counsel when making arrangements for you. eat and sleep. i have so much care and pity for you that you could call me friend. and so, good-bye.", "my master and my lord!", "not true. good-bye.", "he's trying to talk me into forgetting my nobility, girls. but listen, charmian.", "it's time to end it, good lady. the bright day of our lives is over, and now there will only be darkness.", "go out again. i've already given the order, and it is ready. hurry with your errand.", "i will, madam."], ["where's the queen?", "look, sir.", "dolabella.", "madam, according to my promise which my love to you has made a religious vow i tell you that caesar intends to travel through syria. within three days you and your children will be sent ahead. make the best use of this information you can. i have done your bidding and fulfilled my promise.", "dolabella, i will always be in debt to you.", "and i your servant. good-bye, good queen. i must go attend caesar.", "farewell, and thanks.", "now, iras, what do you think? you will be exhibited in rome along with me, like egyptian puppets. crude slaves with greasy aprons, rulers, and hammers shall lift us up so everyone can see. their stinking breath will form a cloud around us, and we'll be forced to inhale it."], ["the gods forbid!", "no, it's certain, iras. insolent will paw us as if we were streetwalkers. disreputable minstrels will write bawdy songs about us. hotheaded comedians will stage impromptu impersonations of us and depict the celebrations we had in alexandria. antony will be portrayed as a drunk, and i'll see some boy with a squeaking voice play cleopatra as if i were a whore.", "oh, the good gods!", "no, that's the truth.", "i'll never see it. i know my nails are stronger than my eyes; i'll scratch them out.", "why, that's just the way to frustrate their plans and defeat their absurd intentions.", "now, charmian! women, dress me like a queen. go get my best clothes. i will once again be as fine as when i went to cydnus to meet marc antony. iras, go. now, charmian, we'll be quick indeed. and after you've done this chore, i'll give you permission to amuse yourself until doomsday. bring our crown and all the royal symbols of office."], ["what's that noise?", "there's a farmer here who won't leave without seeing your highness. he has brought you figs.", "let him come in.", "what a poor instrument, that can do such a noble deed! he brings me freedom. my mind is made up. there's nothing of the weak woman left in me. now from head to foot i'm as firm as marble. now the inconstant moon has nothing to do with me.", "this is the man.", "leave us.", "do you have in there the pretty snake of the nile that kills without pain?", "i certainly do have him, but i wouldn't advise you to touch him. his bite is fatal. people who die of it seldom or never recover."], ["do you remember anyone who died of it?", "many people, men and women alike. i heard of one just yesterday. she was a very honest woman but rather inclined to lie which a woman shouldn't do unless she's protecting her reputation. i heard how she died of its bite, how much pain she felt. indeed, she gives a very good testimony of the snake's power. but if you believe everything they say, you won't be saved by half of what they do. but this is a sure thing: the snake's an odd snake.", "you may leave now. farewell.", "i hope you are pleased with the snake.", "farewell.", "you must know that the snake will act according to his nature.", "yes, yes. farewell.", "listen, the snake is dangerous unless handled by people who are used to him. there isn't any kindness in the snake.", "don't worry; we'll remember your warnings.", "good. don't feed it, i beg you. it's not worth feeding.", "will it eat me?", "don't think i'm so dumb that i don't know that the devil himself won't eat a woman. i know that a woman is a dish fit only for the gods, as long as the devil hasn't prepared the meal. but devils cause a lot of trouble for the gods regarding their women. for every ten women the gods make, the devils ruin five."], ["well, you can go now. farewell.", "yes, truly, i wish you good luck with the snake.", "give me my robe. put on my crown. i long to be immortal. i won't drink egyptian wine again.", "quickly, quickly, good iras, quickly. i think i hear antony call me. i see him revive himself to praise my noble act. i hear him mock caesar's luck, which the gods give to men in order to balance out their subsequent wrath. husband, i'm coming! now let my courage prove my title as wife. i am now made of fire and air, and i leave the other elements, earth and water, to this mortal life. so, are you done? come then, kiss me and take the last bit of warmth from my lips. good-bye, kind charmian. iras, i won't see you again for a long time.", "do i have the asp's poison on my lips? did you fall? if you can leave your body so easily, then the touch of death is like a lover's pinch, which hurts but is desired. do you lie still? if you leave like that, you tell the world that it's not worthy of a good-bye."], ["clouds, dissolve into rain, so that i could say the gods themselves are weeping!", "this proves that i'm petty: if iras meets antony before me, he'll want her first and give her the kiss that is my bliss to have. come, you deadly villain.", "separate me from life with your sharp teeth. poor poisonous fool, be angry and bite. oh, if you could speak, i might hear you call caesar an ass who's been outsmarted!", "oh, eastern star!", "quiet, quiet! don't you see my baby suckling at my breast so that its nurse will fall asleep?", "oh, if my heart would only break!", "the poison is as sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle oh, antony! no, i'll take you too.", "why should i stay", "in this vile world? so, good-bye. now, death, you can boast that you have an incomparable girl in your possession. close, soft eyes."], ["the sun will never be seen by such royal eyes again. your crown is crooked. i'll straighten it, then play", "where's the queen?", "speak softly. don't wake her.", "caesar has sent", "too slow a messenger.", "oh, come quickly! i almost feel you.", "come in. ho! all's not well. caesar's been deceived.", "there's dolabella, who was sent from caesar. call him.", "what kind of work is this, charmian? is this well done?", "it is well done, and appropriate for a princess who has descended from so many royal kings. ah, soldier!", "what's going on in here?", "they're all dead.", "caesar, you thought this would happen. you're coming here yourself to see the dreaded act you had tried to stop."], ["step aside, step aside for caesar!", "oh, sir, you are too good at predicting the future. what you were afraid of has happened.", "she was bravest at the end. she knew what i intended to do with her and, being royal, she took her own way out. how did they die? i don't see any blood.", "who was with them last?", "a simple country farmer who brought her figs. this was the basket.", "they were poisoned, then.", "oh, caesar, this charmian lived until a moment ago. she stood and spoke. i found her adjusting the crown on her dead mistress. she stood trembling, then suddenly dropped dead.", "oh, noble weakness! if they had swallowed poison, it would be evident by external swelling. but she looks like she's asleep, as if she would charm another antony.", "here on her breast there's a little bloody mark. there's a similar mark on her arm."], ["this is an asp's trail, and these fig leaves have slime on them, just like the kind that asps deposit on the caves by the nile.", "that's probably how she died. her doctor told me she had searched for an infinite number of easy ways to die. pick up her bed and carry her ladies out of the tomb. she shall be buried next to her antony. no other grave on earth shall hold a pair this famous. momentous events like these strike those that cause them. antony and cleopatra's story is as pitiable as my military exploits are glorious. our army shall somberly attend this funeral and then depart for rome. come, dolabella. see that there is a dignified splendor to this great solemnity."]], [["i remember, adam, that's why my father only left me a thousand crowns in his will. and as you know, my father commanded my brother, oliver, to make sure that i was brought up well and that's where my sadness begins. oliver keeps my brother jaques away at school, and everyone says he's doing extremely well there. but he keeps me at home in the country to be precise, he keeps me stuck at home but doesn't support me. i ask you, is this any way to treat a gentleman as nobly born as i am, to pen me in like an ox? his horses get treated better than i do at least he feeds them and trains them properly, and spends a lot of money on trainers for them. all i've gained from his care is weight, which makes me as indebted to him as his animals on the manure pile are. he gives me plenty of nothing, and takes away everything else, letting me eat with his servants, refusing me what's owed me as his brother, and ruining my good birth with a poor education. this is what angers me, adam. my father's temper and spirit, which i think i share, makes me want to mutiny against my brother's tyranny. i won't stand for it any longer, though i haven't yet figured out how to revolt.", "here comes my master, your brother.", "go hide, adam, and you'll hear how he abuses me."], ["hey, you! what are you here?", "nothing. i've never been taught how to make anything.", "well, then, what are you messing up?", "i'm helping mess up one of god's creations your poor, unworthy brother by having him do nothing.", "indeed, sir, find something better to do and get lost for a while.", "should i tend your pigs and eat husks with them? when did i so much money that i ended up this poor?", "do you know where you are, sir?", "yes, sir, very well i'm here in your orchard.", "do you know whom you're talking to?", "yes, better than you know me. i know you're my oldest brother, and deserve more respect. but we're in the same family, so you should acknowledge that i am a gentleman too. according to custom, as the first-born you are my superior. but it's not customary to treat me like i'm not even a gentleman, even if there were twenty brothers between you and me. i have as much of our father in me as you do, though i admit you're closer to him and matter more because you're older."], ["orlando what nerve!", "oliver come on, big brother; you don't know anything about fighting.", "what, you dare put your hands on me, villain?", "i'm no villain. i'm the youngest son of sir rowland de boys, and anyone who claims my father's sons are villains is a villain himself. if you weren't my brother, i'd leave this hand of mine on your neck until i'd pulled out your tongue for talking like this. you've only insulted yourself.", "gentlemen, calm down. for the sake of your father's memory, make peace.", "let me go, i say.", "i won't until i'm ready. you will listen to me. my father instructed you in his will to give me a good education. but you've raised me as a peasant, hiding from me what i needed to become a gentleman. my father's spirit is growing in me, and i won't take this any longer. either give me the freedom to act like someone of my own rank or give me my share of the inheritance, so that i can seek my fortune elsewhere.", "and what are you going to do after you've spent your money? beg? well, sir, go inside. i'm not going to be bothered by you for long. you'll get some of what you want. now please leave me alone."], ["i won't bother you any more than necessary.", "adam and you get lost too, you old dog.", "is that my reward to be called \"old dog?\" well, it's true, i've served this family so long i've gotten old and toothless, like a dog. god bless my old master. he would never have spoken to me like this.", "is that how it's going to be? are you starting to challenge me? i'll cure you of your insolence, and i'm not going to give you a thousand crowns, either! hey, dennis!", "did you call for me, your worship?", "wasn't charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?", "yes, sir, he's here at the door right now and asks to see you.", "call him in.", "i have a good plan. and tomorrow is the wrestling match."], ["good morning, sir.", "good mr. charles! tell me, what's the latest news at the new court?", "no news but the old news: the old duke senior has been banished by his younger brother, the new duke frederick. a few loyal lords have gone into exile with duke senior, and given up their lands and money to frederick so he's happy enough to have them leave.", "can you tell me whether rosalind, duke senior's daughter, has also been banished?", "oh, no. duke frederick's daughter, celia, grew up with rosalind, and celia loves her cousin so much that she would have either followed her into exile or died of grief. rosalind has stayed at court, where duke frederick loves her like his own daughter. no two women ever loved each other like they do.", "where will the old duke live?", "they say he's already in the forest of arden. he has many cheerful men with him, and they live like robin hood and his outlaws. people say that new batches of young men flock there every day, and that they all pass the time without a care, like people did in the .", "so, are you going to wrestle before the new duke tomorrow?"], ["indeed i do, sir, and i've come to let you in on a certain problem. i've been informed by certain sources i can't disclose that your younger brother orlando plans to fight me in disguise. tomorrow, sir, i'm fighting for my reputation, and any man who gets away without a broken bone or two is an exceptional wrestler indeed. your brother is young and inexperienced, and because of my affection for you, i'd hate to crush him though i'd have to, if he challenged me. i'm telling you all this out of affection for you, so you can either keep him from carrying out his plans or prepare to accept his disgrace, which will be his own fault, not mine.", "charles, i thank you for your loyalty to me, and you'll see that i'll reward you. i'd heard about my brother's plan and have been subtly trying to change his mind, but he's determined. i tell you, charles, he's the stubbornest young fellow in france: overly ambitious, jealous of other people's good qualities, and a traitor against me, his own blood brother. so use your discretion. i'd be just as happy if you broke his neck as his finger. and you'd better be careful, because if you embarrass him at all in fact, if he doesn't beat you thoroughly he'll come after you and won't leave you alone till he's poisoned you or trapped you killed you, in other words, one way or another. it brings me to tears to say this, but there isn't another person alive who is so young and at the same time so wicked. because he's my brother, i have to take his side. but if i really laid him bare, i'd have to weep and hang my head, and you would not believe me, his behavior is so shocking."], ["i'm very glad i came to see you. if he shows up tomorrow, i'll give him what's coming to him. if he can manage to walk after our fight, i'll never wrestle for money again. farewell, my lord.", "take care, charles.", "now it's time to get this playboy brother of mine all worked up. i hope i'll see the end of him soon i don't know why, but i hate nothing in the world as much as him, though he's an upstanding guy. he's never gone to school but he's smart, with good values, and everyone is delighted by him and loves him, especially my subjects, who know him the best. they love him, and therefore they despise me. but not for long; charles will take care of everything. all i have to do is get orlando to fight, which i'll do now."], ["please, rosalind, my sweet cousin be happy.", "dear celia i already look much happier than i feel, but you want me to look even happier? unless you can also teach me how to forget my banished father, you shouldn't try to teach me how to be happy.", "well, by this i can see that you don't love me as much as i love you. if father had banished my father, i could have learned to love your father as my own, as long as i still had you. you'd do the same, if your love for me were as true as mine for you.", "well, i'll just forget the difficulties of my situation, in order to focus on the happiness of yours.", "you know i'm my father's only child, and he isn't likely to have another. and when he dies, you will inherit his fortune because whatever he took from your father by force, i will return to you as affection. i swear i will, and if i ever break my promise let me turn into a monster. so please, my sweet rose, my dear rose, be happy.", "from now on i will, cousin, and i'll think of all kinds of games for us. let me see what do you think about falling in love?", "yes, please do, so we can have a good laugh about it. but don't fall in love for real, and don't take the game too far. you want to get out of it easily, and with your honor intact."], ["well, then, what should we do for fun instead?", "let's go find that hussy, fortune, and and mock her till she starts distributing her gifts more equally.", "i wish we could do that, because fortune gives all of her gifts to the wrong people, and she especially gets things wrong where women are concerned.", "it's true: the women she makes beautiful she also makes slutty, and the women she makes pure and virginal she also makes ugly.", "no, you're getting fortune and nature mixed up: nature determines how we're made, and fortune decides what happens to us.", "oh, really? well, when nature makes a person beautiful, can't fortune make her fall into a fire, thereby making her ugly after all? and even though nature has given us the wit to have this argument, hasn't fortune sent this fool here to stop us?", "yes, and now fortune is playing a nasty trick on nature: she's breaking up a show of wit between two naturally witty women with the arrival of a natural fool.", "well, maybe this is nature's work after all. maybe nature sensed that we're not smart enough to be having this high-flown discussion about goddesses, so she sent us this fool to use as a mental . after all, smart peoples' wits are always sharpened by the presence of a fool. what's up, you wit? where are you wandering off to?"], ["mistress, you have to go see your father.", "did they make you the messenger?", "no, by my honor, but they told me to come .", "where'd you learn a phrase like, \"by my honor,\" fool?", "from a certain knight who swore on his honor that the pancakes he was eating were good, and that the mustard on top of them he swore on his honor was bad. now, i'll swear to the opposite that the pancakes were rotten, and the mustard was fine but even so, the knight wasn't lying.", "and how, out of your great heap of knowledge, will you manage to prove that?", "yes, please; unleash your wisdom.", "watch me: stroke your chins and swear by your beards that i am a knave.", "by our beards (if we had them), you are a knave.", "and i swear by my wickedness (if i had any) that i am a knave. but you can't swear by what you don't have and this knight had no honor, or if he did, he swore it off before he ever saw those pancakes and that mustard."], ["tell me, who is this knight?", "a man old frederick, your father, loves.", "if he has my father's love, then that's enough honor for me. enough of this. no more talk about my father; you'll be whipped for slander one of these days.", "it's a pity that fools aren't allowed to speak wisely about the foolish things that wise men do.", "honestly, you're speaking the truth ever since the fools were , the foolishness of wise men has become all the more apparent. here comes monsieur le beau.", "with his mouth full of news.", "which he'll shove down our throats the way pigeons feed their young.", "then we'll be stuffed with news.", "well that's good. if we're up, we'll be worth more. hello, monsieur le beau. what's the news?", "fair princess, you've missed some good sport.", "sport? of what ?"], ["what color, madam? i don't understand how should i answer that?", "however your wit and luck allow.", "or however the destinies say you should.", "nicely done; you laid on thick.", "well, if i don't keep up my rank", "you'll lose your .", "you're confusing me, ladies. i was going to tell you all about a good wrestling match that's going on, which you're missing.", "tell us about this wrestling.", "i'll tell you about the beginning, and if you find that interesting you can see the end. the best is yet to come, and they're going to perform it right here.", "well, we've missed the beginning; it's dead and buried.", "there comes an old man with his three sons", "it sounds like the beginning of an old folktale.", "three proper young men, all good looking and with great presence"], ["right, and they wore proclamations around their necks, saying, \"be it known to all men by these \"", "the eldest of the three brothers wrestled with charles, the duke's wrestler. immediately, charles threw the brother, breaking three of his ribs; it's not likely he will survive. charles did the same to the second brother, and the third. they're lying over there, and the poor old man, their father, weeps so piteously over them that the whole audience has joined him in grieving.", "oh, dear!", "but tell me, monsieur what sport are the ladies missing?", "why, the one i just told you about.", "men must be getting wiser every day; that's the first time i've heard that rib-breaking was appropriate entertainment for ladies.", "me too, i swear.", "doesn't anyone else want to see this, and hear breath wheezing out from broken ribs? does anyone else love rib breaking? shall we go watch this wrestling, cousin?"], ["you're going to have to, if you stay here. this is the place they're scheduled to wrestle, and they're ready to go.", "yes, i see them coming. let's stay and watch.", "come on. since the youth won't be reasoned with, he'll have to suffer for his stubbornness.", "is that the man?", "that's him, madam.", "alas, he is too young. yet he seems capable.", "what's up, daughter and niece? have you snuck over here to watch the wrestling?", "yes, my lord, if you give us permission.", "you won't enjoy it much, i can tell you, the odds are so against this young man. because he's so young, i've tried to discourage him, but he won't listen. talk to him, ladies. see if you can persuade him.", "call him over here, good monsieur le beau.", "go ahead. i'll make myself scarce."], ["mister challenger, the princess wants to speak to you.", "i'll wait on them with all respect and duty.", "young man, have you challenged charles the wrestler?", "no, lovely princess. he is the general challenger. i have only come in like the others have to try to fight him with the strength of my youth.", "young gentleman, you are too bold for your age. you have seen the cruel proof of this man's strength. if you took a good look at yourself, or if you thought about this more carefully, your fear would teach you to act more cautiously. we beg you, for your own sake, to respect your safety and give up.", "please, young sir. we'll make sure your reputation isn't hurt; we'll take it upon ourselves to argue with the duke that the wrestling match should be called off.", "i beg you not to think poorly of me though i suppose anyone who could deny anything to such beautiful women deserves to be scorned. but please, send me good thoughts in this match. if i'm beaten, the shame is all mine, and i wasn't in anyone's good graces to begin with. if i'm killed, it will only be the death of a man who was willing to be dead. i won't wrong any of my friends, because i don't have any to mourn for me, and i won't have wronged the world, because i don't have anything in the world. in this world, i'm only taking up space. if i leave, maybe someone more worthy will fill it.", "i wish i could give you the little strength that i have.", "mine too, to join hers."], ["good luck. i hope to god i'm wrong about your chances.", "i hope you get what you desire!", "come on, where's the young who's so eager to lie with mother earth?", "ready, sir, but i have more modest ambitions.", "you get only one round.", "no, i'm sure your grace won't be able to persuade him to try a second round, even though you couldn't dissuade him from trying the first.", "you should mock me you've beaten me, not before. come on.", "give you speed, young man!", "i wish i were invisible, so i could grab that strong fellow by the leg.", "oh, what an excellent young man!"], ["if i could shoot lightning bolts from my eyes, i can tell you who'd be on the ground.", "no more, no more.", "oh, come on, your grace i'm barely out of breath.", "how are you doing, charles?", "he can't speak, my lord.", "carry him away. what is your name, young man?", "orlando, my lord, the youngest son of sir rowland de boys.", "i wish you were someone else's son. the whole world thought your father was an honorable man, but he was always my enemy. your victory would have pleased me more if you'd been someone else's son. but good luck; you are a brave young man. i wish you had told me you had a different father.", "if i were my father, cousin, would i do this?", "i'm proud to be sir rowland's son his youngest son and i would never change that, not even to be frederick's adopted heir."], ["my father loved sir rowland as much as he loved his own soul, and the rest of the world shared my father's opinion. if i had known this young man was his son, i would have tried harder to convince him not to fight.", "gentle cousin, let's go thank him and encourage him. my my father's rude and envious behavior is like a knife through my heart. orlando sir, you fought very well. if you live up to your potential in love as well, your wife will be a very happy woman.", "gentleman, wear this for me. i'm a woman who's down on her luck, and i'd give more if i could. shall we go, cousin?", "yes. good luck, fair gentleman.", "can't i even say \"thank you\"? i left my brain back on the wrestling field. what's left of me is a dummy, just a lifeless block.", "he's calling us back. my fell when my fortunes did; i'll ask him what he wants. did you call us, sir? sir, you wrestled well and conquered more than just your enemies.", "will you come on, cousin?", "i'm coming. farewell."], ["what is this passion that ties up my tongue? i can't speak to her, even though she asked me to. oh, poor orlando, you've been overthrown! either charles or some prettier thing has mastered you.", "good sir, as a friend, i advise you to leave this place. although you deserve praise, applause, and love, right now the duke misconstrues everything you've done. the duke is temperamental. i'm sure you can imagine what i mean without my having to spell it out.", "thank you, sir. now please tell me this: which of the two ladies who were at the wrestling match is the duke's daughter?", "neither one is his daughter, to judge from their good manners. but really, the smaller one is his daughter. the other is the daughter of the banished duke. duke frederick keeps her for his daughter's sake; the love between the two of them is stronger than the bond between sisters. but i will tell you that lately the duke has been displeased with his niece, and for no other reason than that people praise her virtues and pity her for her father's sake. i swear, one day the duke's malice toward rosalind will suddenly erupt. goodbye, sir. later, in a better world than this, i'd love to get to know you."], ["i'm indebted to you. goodbye.", "out of the frying pan and into the fire from a tyrant duke to a tyrant brother! but, oh, heavenly rosalind!"], ["what's going on, rosalind? cupid have mercy! you won't utter a single word?", "i don't even have one to throw at a dog.", "no, your words are too precious to be wasted on dogs. throw some of your words at me. come on, throw your words at me like you would throw stones at a dog.", "then there would be two cousins lying sick in bed: one hurt by reasons and the other gone crazy without any.", "is all of this about your father?", "no, some of it is about my child's father. oh, this world is full of thorns!", "they're only burrs, cousin, thrown at you because you took a holiday from conventional behavior. if we walk on the well-worn paths, they won't get caught in our petticoats.", "those burrs i could shake off my clothing, but these are in my heart.", "cough them up.", "i'd try it, if i could cry \"hem\" and have him.", "come on, take control of your feelings."], ["but they're siding with a better wrestler than myself.", "oh, that's a good wish! you'll fight with him eventually, and . but let's put these jokes aside for a moment, and speak earnestly. is it possible that you could have fallen in love with orlando, sir rowland's youngest son, this suddenly?", "the duke, my father, loved his father very much.", "does that necessarily mean you should love his son? by that kind of logic, i should hate orlando, since my father hates his father. but i don't hate orlando.", "no, please don't hate him for my sake.", "why shouldn't i? doesn't he deserve it?", "let me love him because he deserves it, and you can love him because i do. look, here comes the duke.", "he looks angry.", "madam, hurry as fast as you can get out of my court.", "me, uncle?", "you, niece. in ten days time, if you're found within twenty miles of the court, you'll die for it."], ["please, your grace, tell me what crime i have committed. if i know my own thoughts and desires, and i'm not dreaming or crazy which i'm sure i'm not then, dear uncle, i've never had so much as a half-formed thought that would have offended you.", "all traitors protest like this. if they could purge their guilt simply by saying that they were innocent, they'd all be as innocent as god himself. i don't trust you. enough said.", "but your mistrust alone can't make me a traitor on what basis do you suspect me?", "you are your father's daughter. that's enough.", "i was his daughter when your highness took my father's dukedom. i was his daughter when you banished him. treason is not inherited, my lord. but even if we did inherit it from our family, what does that have to do with me? my father wasn't a traitor. so, please, my lord, don't assume that i'm treacherous just because i'm poor, with no titles to my name.", "dear master, listen to me.", "yes, celia, we kept her here for your sake. otherwise, she would have been banished with her father."], ["at that time, i didn't beg you to keep her here; you wanted her here, and you felt guilty. i was too young at the time to appreciate her value, but now i know her. if she's a traitor, why then, so am i. we have always slept together, woken up together, learned, played, and eaten together. wherever we went, we went together and inseparable.", "she's too devious for you. her smoothness, her silence, and her patient suffering appeal to the people, and they pity her. you're a fool. she's robbing you of the attention you deserve. you will seem even brighter and more virtuous when she's out of the picture. so be quiet. the sentence i've passed down on her is firm and unshakeable. she is banished.", "then lay that sentence on me too, my lord. i cannot live without her.", "you are a fool. you, niece, prepare to leave. on my honor and by my word, if you outstay the ten days, you will die.", "oh, my poor rosalind, where will you go? do you want to exchange fathers? i'll give you mine. i insist, don't be more distressed than i am.", "i have more reason to be distressed."], ["no you haven't, cousin. please, be cheerful. don't you realize the duke has also banished me, his daughter?", "no, he hasn't.", "oh, he hasn't? well, then, you don't have the affection that would teach you that you and i are one. will we be separated? should we part, sweet girl? no. let my father find another heir. so, help me plan how we'll escape, where we'll go, and what we'll take with us. don't even try to take this all upon yourself, bearing your grief alone and leaving me out. i swear by the heavens, which have grown pale in sympathy with us, i'm going with you, whatever you say.", "but where will we go?", "to the forest of arden, to find your father.", "but what danger we'll put ourselves in, two young, innocent women traveling so far! fresh beauty attracts thugs and thieves even more than money.", "i'll put on some poor and ragged clothes and smudge my face with dirt. you do the same, and we'll be able to travel without attracting any attackers' attention.", "wouldn't it be better since i'm unusually tall for a woman to dress myself like a man? i'll wear a big sword in my belt, carry a boar-spear in my hand, and hide all my womanish fear in my heart. we'll maintain a swaggering, warrior look, like so many cowardly men, whose manner has nothing to do with what they're feeling."], ["what should i call you when you're a man?", "i'll take no lesser name than that of own servant. so call me ganymede. and what will you be called?", "something that refers to my current state. instead of celia, call me aliena.", "cousin, what if we brought that clownish fool of your father's court, touchstone? wouldn't he be a comfort to us in our travels?", "he'd walk the whole wide world with me. leave me alone to go convince him. let's go gather our jewels and money. we'll figure out the best time and safest route to avoid being found out by my father's guards, whom he'll send out as soon as he discovers i've gone. now, we go contentedly to freedom not banishment."], ["now, my companions and brothers in exile, hasn't experience made this simple life sweeter than a life of glittery pomp and circumstance? aren't these woods less perilous than the court, with all its jealousies and intrigues? out here we feel the changing of the seasons, but we're not bothered by it. when the icy fangs of the brutal, scolding wind bite and blow on my body, even though i'm shivering with cold, i can appreciate the weather's honesty. i smile and think, \"thank goodness the wind doesn't flatter me: it's like a councilor who makes me feel what i'm really made of.\" adversity can have its benefits like the ugly, poisonous that wears a precious jewel in its forehead. in this life, far away from the civilized world, we can hear the language of the trees, read the books of the running streams, hear sermons in the stones, and discover the good in every single thing.", "i wouldn't change my situation for anything. you're lucky, my lord, to be able to see the peace and sweetness even in what bad luck has brought you.", "come, shall we hunt some deer for dinner? it bothers me, though, that these poor spotted innocents, who, after all, are this deserted city's native citizens, should be gouged with arrows."], ["indeed, my lord, the gloomy jaques grieves over these deaths. he swears that when you kill the deer, you're a worse usurper than your brother was for banishing you. today, lord amiens and i followed jaques. we saw him lie down along a brook under an oak tree whose ancient roots peeked out from the earth. a poor, lonely stag who had been hurt by a hunter's arrow came to rest there, where he heaved such heavy groans that the effort seemed to stretch his hide to bursting. big, round tears ran piteously down the animal's innocent nose. the hairy fool, watched closely by sad jaques, stood on the very edge of the brook, adding his own tears to the streaming water.", "and what did jaques say? didn't he take the opportunity to draw a moral from the scene?", "oh, yes, he created a thousand comparisons. first, he spoke of the deer's needless addition to the stream's water supply. \"poor deer,\" he said, \"you're just like a human: you add more to what already has too much.\" then, about the deer's being alone, abandoned by his velvety companions: \"it's appropriate,\" he said, \"that a miserable creature should excuse itself from company.\" just then, a carefree herd of deer, having just eaten their fill of pasture grass, bounded along without stopping to greet their wounded brother. \"sure,\" said jaques, \"hurry on, you fat and greasy citizens. why stop and notice this poor, broken, bankrupt creature here?\" in this way, he most insightfully pierced to the heart of the country, the city, the court, and even our lives out here in the forest, swearing that we are mere usurpers and tyrants, frightening and killing animals in their own homes."], ["and did you leave him like this?", "we did, my lord, weeping and carrying on about the sobbing deer.", "take me to him. i love to argue with him when he's having one of these fits, because then he always has a lot to say.", "i'll bring you to him right away."], ["can it be possible that no one saw them leave? it cannot be. some villains in my court must have known about this and let it happen.", "i can't find anyone who saw her leave. her ladies-in-waiting saw her go to bed, and early this morning the bed was empty.", "my lord, that dirty clown whom you laughed at so often is also missing. hisperia, the princess's gentlewoman, confesses that she overheard your daughter and her cousin praising the good looks and skills of the wrestler who recently beat the muscular charles. hisperia believes that, wherever they have gone, that young man is likely with them.", "send a message to his brother. bring that swinger orlando here. if he's not around, bring his brother oliver to me. i'll make oliver find him. do this immediately, and don't stop searching and interrogating until you've brought home these foolish runaways."], ["who's there?", "my young master! oh, my gentle master! my sweet master! oh, you living memory of old sir rowland! what are you doing here? why are you so strong and good? why do people love you? and why are you noble, strong, and brave? why would you be so foolish as to beat the moody duke's favorite champion? your praise has beaten you home. don't you know, master, that some men's best qualities do them in? yours are like that complete and utter traitors to you. oh, what a world this is, when even what is beautiful in a man poisons him!", "why, what's the matter?", "oh, unlucky boy! don't walk through these doors. in this house lives a man who despises all that is good in you. oliver, your brother no, not your brother; and yet he's the son but no, i won't call him the son of that great man i was about to call his father, has heard about how well you did in the wrestling match, and tonight he's planning on burning your house down, with you in it. and if he fails at that, he will find other ways to kill you. i overheard him and his plans. this is no place for you; this home is now a slaughterhouse. hate it, fear it, do not come inside."], ["then where would you have me go, adam?", "it doesn't matter where, so long as it's not here.", "what, would you have me beg for my food? or become a lowlife, sticking up travelers on the road? this is all that's left for me to do, but i won't do it. i'd rather give myself up to the hatred of a violent brother who refuses to recognize that we are brothers.", "but don't do that. i have five-hundred gold coins, which i carefully saved when i was working for your late father. i meant to use it for my retirement, to help me when my old body was lame and forgotten in some dark corner. but take the money, and god, who feeds even the raven and looks after even the sparrow, will comfort me in my old age. here is the gold, i give it all to you. let me be your servant. i know i may be old, but i'm strong and healthy, because in my youth i never drank nor lived recklessly. therefore, my old age is like a blustery winter: cold, but kindly. let me go with you. i'll do everything a younger man could do for you."], ["oh, good old man, you're a great example of that old work ethic, where people worked because it was their duty, not just for the money. your approach isn't the fashion these days, when no one works hard except for a promotion, and, as soon as they've got it, they stop working. but in working for me, old man, you are pruning a rotten tree: despite all your pains and efforts, it won't yield a single blossom. come along, though. we'll go together, and before we've spent all the savings of your youth, we'll find a way to make a living.", "go on, master, and i will follow you with truth and loyalty to my last breath. from the time i was seventeen, over sixty years ago, i have lived in this house, but now i will live here no more. many men seek their fortune at seventeen; at eighty, it's a bit late. but fortune could not reward me better than to let me die well, without owing my master anything."], ["oh lord, my spirits are tired!", "i wouldn't care about my spirits, if my legs weren't tired.", "i'd insult my manly wardrobe by weeping like a woman if i didn't have to comfort the weaker vessel here, as the ought to be brave for the sake of the petticoat. so, have courage, good aliena.", "please bear with me. i can't go any further.", "i'd rather bear with you than you. but if i did carry you, it would be no to bear, because i'm pretty sure you don't have any money.", "well, this is the forest of arden.", "yes, now i'm in arden, and that makes me the bigger fool. when i was at home, i was in a better place. but travelers have to be content.", "yes, be content, good touchstone.", "look who's coming: a young man and an old man, having a serious talk."], ["what you're doing is the way to make her scorn you continually.", "oh, corin, i wish you could understand how much i love her!", "i'm sure i can guess. i have been in love too, you know.", "no corin, since you're old, you cannot guess even if you were as dedicated a lover in your youth as there ever was, sighing and mooning all night long. if your love was anything like mine and i'm sure that no man has loved as i love now exactly how many ridiculous actions did your fantasizing lead you to?", "oh, a thousand of them, all of which i've forgotten.", "oh, then you never loved as wholeheartedly as me. if you can't remember the stupidest little thing love made you do, you haven't loved. or if you haven't sat as i do now, boring your listener with all your lover's virtues, then you haven't loved. or if you haven't broken away from human company, as my feelings now lead me to do, you haven't loved. o phoebe, phoebe, phoebe!", "oh, poor shepherd! listening to you speak of your wounded heart reminds me of my own pain."], ["me too. i remember when i was in love, i broke my sword on a stone, and told him to take that for coming at night to see jane smile. i remember kissing her washing stick and the cow's udders that her pretty, chapped hands had milked. i remember wooing a pea plant in her name, and then taking two pea pods and begging her to wear them \"for my sake.\" those of us who are really in love will do the strangest things. but everything that lives is mortal, including the foolishness of love.", "you speak more wisely than you know.", "nah, i'll never be aware of my own wit, until i break my shins on it.", "by god! this shepherd's condition is like my own.", "and like mine, but i'm getting a little tired of it.", "please, one of you go ask that man over there if we can buy some food off him. i'm faint with hunger.", "corin) hey, clown!", "shut up, fool. he's not your relative.", "who's calling?", "your superiors.", "if they weren't my betters, they'd be pretty wretched indeed."], ["touchstone stop it, i say. good evening to you, friend.", "good evening to you, too, noble sir, and to all of you.", "please sir, if love or money can buy anything in this empty place, tell us where we can rest and feed ourselves. we'll pay you for the information. we have a young woman here who is very tired from traveling and faint with hunger.", "dear sir, i pity the lady and wish more for her sake than my own that i was more able to help her. but i'm a hired hand: i don't profit from the flocks i tend. my master is a brutish man and doesn't care much if he gets to heaven by deeds of hospitality or not. besides, his cottage, his flocks, and his grazing rights are on sale now, and since he's not there, there's nothing to eat at our house. but let's see what's on hand. if i have anything to say about it, you will be most welcome there.", "who wants to buy the flock and the pasture?", "that young man who was just here. but he doesn't really care about buying anything.", "please, if you can do it without taking advantage of the young man, buy the cottage, pasture, and flock for us, and we'll pay you for it."], ["and we will raise your wages. i like this place. i could see myself wasting time here.", "the thing is definitely going to be sold. come with me. if you like what you see of the land, the profit that's possible, and this rustic life, i'll be your faithful servant, and buy the place with your gold right away."], ["", "more, more, please, more.", "it's only going to make you sad, monsieur jaques.", "i'm glad about that. more, please, more. i can suck sadness out of a song the way a weasel sucks eggs. more, please, more.", "my voice is ragged. i know i won't please you.", "i don't want you to please me, i want you to sing. come on, another stanza is that what you call 'em, \"stanzas\"?", "call them whatever you want, monsieur jaques.", "nah, i don't care what their are; they owe me nothing. will you sing?"], ["okay, but only because you want me to.", "well then, if i've ever thanked a man, i'll thank you now. but two men complimenting each other is like two baboons getting together. whenever a man compliments me, i feel like he's a beggar and i just gave him a penny an embarrassing exchange. come on, sing and those of you who won't sing, shut up.", "well, i'll finish the song i started. meanwhile, sirs, set the table. the duke will drink under this tree. he's been looking for you all day, you know.", "and i've been avoiding him all day. he's too argumentative for me. i think of as many things as he does, but i just thank heaven and don't show off about it. come, warble for me.", "", "i wrote a verse to this tune, though it's not very imaginative. i'll give it you."], ["and i'll sing it. jaques) it goes like this:", "what's that word \"", "it's a greek invocation, calling fools into a circle. i'm going to take a nap, if i can if i can't, i'll curse all the first-born children of egypt.", "and i'll go find the duke; his banquet is ready."], ["dear master, i can't go any farther. oh, i'm dying of hunger. i'll lie down here and measure out my grave. farewell, kind master.", "hey, what's this, adam? no braver than this? live a little, be comforted a little, cheer up a little. if i can find any animal in this wild forest, i'll either be food for it or bring it as food for you. you're not as close to death as you think you are. for my sake, make yourself comfortable; keep death at arm's length for a while. i'll be back soon, and if i haven't brought you anything to eat, i will give you permission to die. but if you die before i return, you'll have made a mockery of my efforts. there we go! you look happier already, and i'll be back quickly. but you're lying out in the cold. come, i'll carry you to shelter. and you won't die for lack of dinner, if there's anything at all to eat in this desert-like forest. cheer up, good adam."], ["i think he must have turned into an animal, because i can't find him anywhere looking like a man.", "my lord, he just left here. he was happy here, listening to a song.", "if that man, who's made up of conflicts, becomes musical, then there must be something wrong with the universe. go find him. tell him i want to speak with him.", "he saved me the trouble: here he comes.", "well, what's going on, mister? what kind of life do you lead that your poor friends must beg for your company? what, you look amused.", "a fool, a fool! i met a in the forest, wearing motley. what a miserable world! as sure as i eat to stay alive, i met a fool who was lying in the sun and complaining about his fortune. he spoke smartly, though he was a fool. \"good morning, fool,\" i said. \"no, sir,\" he said, \"don't call me a fool until heaven has sent me my .\""], ["then he pulled a watch from his bag and, looking at it solemnly, said, \"it's ten o'clock. this way, we can see how the world moves. only an hour ago it was nine, and in another hour it will be eleven. and so, from hour to hour we ripen, and from hour to hour we rot. and there's a story behind that.\" when i heard that motley fool moralizing on the subject of time, i began to crow like a rooster. hearing a fool speaking so contemplatively made me laugh non-stop for an hour. oh, noble fool! a worthy fool! motley is the only thing to wear.", "who is this fool?", "a worthy fool! he's been a courtier and says, \"if ladies are young and pretty, they always know it.\" his is dry as a sailor's biscuit and crammed with all sorts of strange observations, which he presents in mangled fashion. oh, i wish i were a fool! i'm ambitious for one of those motley coats.", "you shall have one."], ["that's all i ask from you, as long as you promise to rid yourself of any rotten idea that i am wise. like the wind, i must have the freedom to blast anyone i please, as fools do. and whoever is most irritated by my foolishness has to laugh the hardest. why, sir, must he? well, it's as plain as the beaten path to a parish church. any person who thinks i'm satirizing them would be stupid if they didn't pretend not to be hurt by my joke. otherwise, they'd be admitting i was talking about them, and the fool would expose the wise man's foolishness with a joke that wasn't even meant for him. dress me up in motley. let me speak my mind, and i'll rid the world of its sickness if it will only tolerate my medicine.", "to hell with you! i know what you'd do.", "what would i do besides good?", "you would be committing a wicked sin by chiding other people for sinning, because you yourself have been a terrible sinner, as carnal in your appetites as lust itself, and all the swollen pustules of sin that you acquired in your freedom you now want to burst and shoot back into the world at large.", "but if i cry out against pride in general, how can anyone say i'm accusing a particular person? aren't we talking about a problem as vast as the sea, that keeps flowing until all the wealth in the world is almost used up by everyone showing off?"], ["what woman in the city am i talking about when i say that the clothes on a city-woman's unworthy back are rich enough to suit a prince? who can say i mean just her when all her neighbors are exactly like her? and when some lowlife protests that fancy clothes aren't my problem, isn't he basically admitting that i'm talking about him? well, then. tell me how i've wronged him. if i was right about him, he's the one who's done wrong. if he isn't guilty of the faults i'm talking about, well then, my accusations fly by like wild geese, whom no one owns, since they don't apply to any man. but who is this?", "stop, and eat no more.", "but i haven't eaten anything yet.", "and you won't until the needy eat.", "what kind of fighting cock is this?", "are you acting so boldly from hardship or because you despise good manners? why do you seem so lacking in civility?", "you were right the first time. my piercing distress has stripped me of smooth manners. but i wasn't raised in the forest, and i was somewhat well-bred. but stop, i say. whoever eats this fruit before i've been taken care of dies."], ["if you won't listen to reason, i'll have to die.", "what would you like? gentlemanly manners have more sway around here than force does.", "i'm dying for food, so let me have some.", "sit down and eat, and welcome to our table.", "do you really speak like such a gentleman? i beg your pardon. i thought everything out here was wild, which is why i acted so stern and commanding. but whoever you are you who sit in the dark shade, losing track of time in this remote forest if you have ever seen better days or been to church or sat at a man's table for a feast or wiped a tear from your eye, if you know what it is to pity and be pitied, let my kindness and nobility persuade you. with that hope, i'll blush at my rudeness and put away my sword.", "we have in fact seen better days and been summoned to church by the ringing of the holy bell and sat at good men's feasts and cried tears of pity therefore, sit down and take whatever will satisfy your needs."], ["then please, put off your eating for a little while i, like a mother doe, find my fawn and bring it food. there is a poor old man who, purely out of love, has limped after me for miles. he's burdened by two debilitating evils age and hunger. until he's fed, i won't eat a thing.", "go find him. we won't touch a thing till you return.", "thank you, and god bless you for your hospitality.", "you see, we're not alone in our unhappiness. this wide, universal theater has more sad plays than our own little scene.", "the whole world is a stage, and all the men and women merely actors. they have their exits and their entrances, and in his lifetime a man will play many parts, his life separated into seven acts. in the first act he is an infant, whimpering and puking in his nurse's arms. then he's the whining schoolboy, with a book bag and a bright, young face, creeping like a snail unwillingly to school. then he becomes a lover, huffing and puffing like a furnace as he writes sad poems about his mistress's eyebrows. in the fourth act, he's a soldier, full of foreign curses, with a beard like a panther, eager to defend his honor and quick to fight."], ["on the battlefield, he puts himself in front of the cannon's mouth, risking his life to seek fame that is as fleeting as a soap bubble. in the fifth act, he is a judge, with a nice fat belly from all the bribes he's taken. his eyes are stern, and he's given his beard a respectable cut. he's full of wise sayings and up-to-the-minute anecdotes: that's the way he plays his part. in the sixth act, the curtain rises on a skinny old man in slippers, glasses on his nose and a money bag at his side. the stockings he wore in his youth hang loosely on his shriveled legs now, and his bellowing voice has shrunk back down to a childish squeak. in the last scene of our play the end of this strange, eventful history our hero, full of forgetfulness, enters his second childhood: without teeth, without eyes, without taste, without everything.", "welcome. set the honorable old man down and let him eat.", "i thank you very much on his behalf.", "you had better do that. i can barely speak to thank you myself.", "welcome. eat. i won't trouble you yet with questions about your situation. some music, please, and, good friend, sing."], ["", "if you really are sir rowland's son, as you've just whispered to me and i can absolutely see the likeness in your face you are truly welcome here. i am the duke who loved your father. come to my cave and tell me the rest of your story. good old man, you are as welcome here as your master is. give him your arm. give me your hand, and explain your situation to me."], ["you haven't seen him since? sir, sir, that can't be true. if i weren't a merciful man, i'd forget about your missing brother and punish you in his place. but do this: find your brother, wherever he is. bring him here dead or alive within the next year, or get out off my land. i'm seizing your lands and all that you possess until your brother gives testimony that absolves you of any guilt.", "i wish your highness knew my true feelings in this matter: i have never in my life loved my brother.", "that makes you an even bigger villain. well, throw him out, and have my officers seize his house and lands. do this immediately, and send him packing."], ["hang there on this tree, you lines of poetry, and bear witness to my love. and you, , queen of the night with your chaste eye, from your pale home up above watch your huntress, who has the power to control my life. oh, rosalind, these trees will be my books i'll write my thoughts down on their bark. that way, everyone who passes through this forest will find your virtues everywhere. run, run, orlando, on every tree carve praises of her beauty, her virtue, and her inexpressibility.", "and how are you liking the shepherd's life, master touchstone?", "well, in and of itself, it is a good life, but given that it's a shepherd's life, it's worthless. in the fact that it's solitary, i enjoy it very much; but in the sense that it's private, it's terrible. now, i'm very pleased with it being outdoors, but in its not being at the court, it is boring. being a simple life, it suits me very well, but being a life without plenty, it doesn't suit me at all. are you any kind of philosopher yourself, shepherd?"], ["only in that i know that the sicker one gets, the worse one feels, and that the man who lacks money, employment, and happiness is without three good friends. i know that rain makes things wet and fire burns things. i know that a good pasture makes sheep fat, that the main cause of night is the absence of sun, and that the man who isn't smart by nature and hasn't learned anything from his schooling will complain of his lack of good manners, or he comes from very dull parents indeed.", "you're a natural-born philosopher! were you ever at court, shepherd?", "honestly, no.", "then you are damned.", "i hope not.", "yep, you're damned like a roasted all on one side.", "i'm damned for not having been at court? explain.", "well, if you were never at court, you were never exposed to good manners; if you never witnessed good manners, your manners must be wicked; wickedness is a sin, and committing sins leads to damnation. you are in a perilous state, shepherd."], ["not at all, touchstone. the good manners of the court look as silly in the country as country behavior is laughable at the court. you told me that you don't salute at the court but kiss hands. now, if courtiers were shepherds, that kind of courtesy would be unclean.", "give a quick example. come, explain.", "why, because we're always handling our ewes, and their fleece, as you know, is greasy.", "what, don't courtiers' hands sweat? and isn't a sheep's grease as wholesome as a man's sweat? that's a poor example. a better example come on.", "besides, our hands are hard and calloused.", "then your lips will feel them more quickly. shallow thinking, yet again. come on.", "our hands are often covered in tar, from performing surgery on our .would you have us country folks kiss each other's tarred hands? courtiers' hands are perfumed.", "you shallow thinker! you worthless man! you are about as much of a thinker as worm's meat is a nice steak. learn from the wise, and comprehend: the courtier's perfume is made from cat discharge much more disgusting than tar. fix your example, shepherd.", "your wit is too courtly for me. i'll rest now."], ["you're going to rest while you're still damned? god help you, foolish man. pray god does some surgery on you: you need to be fixed.", "sir, i'm a true, simple laborer: i earn what i eat, get what i wear, hate no man, envy no man's happiness, am happy for other men's good fortune and satisfied with my own bad fortune, and the source of my greatest pride is watching my ewes graze and my lambs feed.", "that's another sin arising from your ignorance: you bring ewes and rams together and make your living by their copulation. you act as a pimp to a young ewe by forcing her to have sex with a crooked-headed, horny old ram a totally unreasonable match. if you're not damned for that, then the devil must be keeping shepherds out of hell; i can't see how else you can hope to escape.", "here comes young mr. ganymede, my new mistress's brother.", "from the far east to the west indies there is no jewel like rosalind. her worth is carried on the wind and it blows throughout the world, carrying the name of rosalind. all the most beautiful paintings are black when compared to rosalind. don't think of any beauty but the beauty of rosalind."], ["i could rhyme like that for eight years in a row, excepting meal times and sleeping hours. that awful, plodding rhyme sounded like a row of dairy women stomping off to market.", "oh, stop, fool.", "let me try: if there's a buck who needs a doe tell him rosalind will do. a cat in heat will look for a mate, and rosalind certainly will too. winter garments need to be filled with something, and so does skinny rosalind. after you harvest, you have to sheaf and bind so throw ripe rosalind on the harvest cart. the sweetest nut has the sourest rind and rosalind is that kind of nut. the man who finds the sweetest rose will be pricked by it, and by rosalind. this is exactly the false way that verses gallop along. why bother with them?", "quiet, you stupid fool. i found them on a tree.", "well, the tree bears rotten fruit.", "i'll graft you onto that tree, and when i do i'll be grafting onto it a . the fruit the tree bears will be the earliest to ripen in the country because, god knows, be rotten before you're half-ripe, which is how medlars are."], ["all right, you've had your say, but we'll let the forest judge whether or not you spoke wisely.", "quiet! here comes my cousin, reading something; step aside.", "why should this place be a desert just because there are no people in it? no, i'll hang these poems on every tree, and they will voice the thoughts of a city. some will be about how man's brief life is spent in wandering, his entire life contained in the width of an open hand. some poems will be about betrayals committed by friends. but on the prettiest branches or at the end of every sentence i'll write \"rosalinda,\" teaching everyone who can read that the essence of every spirit is contained in this one woman. heaven commanded nature to fill her one body with all the graces that women contain. nature took helen's face, but not her fickle heart; cleopatra's majesty, the best of atalanta, and unhappy lucretia's modesty."], ["so, by heaven's decree, rosalind was composed of different faces, eyes, and hearts, so that she might have the most prized touches of all. heaven wanted rosalind to have these gifts and me to live and die as her slave.", "oh, lord what tedious sayings about love have you been wearing out your congregation with? shouldn't you have warned, \"be patient, good people\"?", "what are you saying? shoo, shepherd, go a little ways away. go with him, touchstone.", "come on, shepherd, let's make an honorable retreat, though not with all the trappings of a full army; just with a shepherd's pouch and the stuff he puts in it.", "were you listening to these verses?", "oh yes, i heard them all, and more, too. some of those lines had more feet than the could bear.", "that's not a problem: the feet can bear the verses.", "sure, but these feet were , and couldn't have stood up without the support of the verses. they stood lamely in the verse."], ["but did you listen to all that poetry without even wondering about what your name is doing on all these trees?", "i was working through my wonder when you arrived. look at what i found on a palm tree. i haven't been rhymed about like this since my past life, when i was an , but i can hardly remember that.", "do you know who wrote these?", "was it a man?", "and he had a chain that once belonged to you hanging around his neck. are you blushing?", "please, who?", "oh god, god! it's difficult to bring two friends together, but even mountains can be moved together by earthquakes.", "no, who are you talking about?", "is it possible?", "no, i'm begging you now, tell me who it is.", "oh, this is wonderful, wonderful just wonderful wonderful! and another wonderful, and beyond-my-ability-to-express wonderful!"], ["good grief, do you think that just because i'm dressed like a man, i have a man's patience? every second you delay is as long and dull as a journey to south seas. i'm begging you, tell me who it is quickly, and speak fast. i wish you could just stammer this hidden man out of your mouth like wine out of a narrow-necked bottle: either too much at once or none at all. i'm begging you, take the cork out of your mouth so i can drink the news.", "so you want to put a man in your belly.", "did god make him? i mean, what sort of man is he? is he enough of a man to wear a hat and grow a beard ?", "no, he has only a little beard.", "well, eventually god will send him some more hair, if he thanks him. i'll wait till his beard grows in, if you'll just hurry up and tell me what chin that beard is on.", "it's orlando, who triumphed over both the wrestler and you in the same instant.", "damn you for mocking me. speak seriously and honestly.", "really, cousin, it's him.", "orlando?", "orlando."], ["oh no! what am i going to do in my man's clothing? what did he do when you saw him? what did he say? how did he look? where did he go? what brings him here? did he ask about me? where is he staying? how did he say good-bye? and when will you see him again? answer me in a word.", "you'd better get me mouth first. the word's too big for any mouth nowadays. answering \"yes\" and \"no\" to all those questions would be harder than answering a .", "but does he know that i'm here in the forest and dressed in men's clothing? does he look as bright and handsome as the day we saw him wrestling?", "it's easier to count specks than to answer a lover's millions of questions. but taste my story, and relish it by paying attention. i found orlando under a tree, like a dropped acorn.", "that tree could be called god's tree, since it drops such wonderful fruit.", "let me talk, good lady.", "go on.", "he lay there, stretched out like a wounded knight.", "though that must have been a pitiful sight, the ground looked beautiful."], ["cry, \"whoa!\" to your tongue, please. it's leaping about like a frisky horse. he was dressed like a hunter.", "oh, that's ominous! he has come to kill my heart.", "i'd like to sing my song solo. you're making me go off-key.", "don't you know that i'm a woman? whatever i think, i have to say. sweetheart, go on.", "you've made me lose the tune. quiet! isn't that him heading this way?", "that's him. let's slink off, and watch him from a hiding place.", "thanks for your company but, really, i would have preferred being alone.", "me too, but still, for the sake of good manners, i'll say thanks for your company.", "goodbye. let's meet as little as we can.", "i also hope that we can be better strangers.", "please don't ruin any more trees by carving love poems on their barks.", "please don't ruin any more of my poems by reading them so badly."], ["your love's name is rosalind?", "yes, that's it.", "i don't like her name.", "they weren't looking to please you when they christened her.", "how tall is she?", "just as tall as my heart.", "you're sure full of smooth answers. are you friendly with goldsmiths' wives, and memorized your little speeches off of their", "no, but i can answer you just like those , where i suppose you memorized all your questions.", "you have a quick wit; i think it must be made out of heels. why don't you sit down with me? the two of us can complain about our mistress the world and all our miseries.", "i won't blame anyone in this world but myself, whose faults i'm most familiar with.", "your worst fault is being in love.", "well, it's a fault i wouldn't trade for your best virtue. i'm tired of you."], ["well, i looking for a fool when i found you, so i suppose i shouldn't be surprised.", "he's drowned in the brook: look in, and you'll see him.", "there i'll see only myself.", "which is either a fool or a nothing.", "i'm not going to waste any more time with you. goodbye, good mr. love.", "i'm glad to see you go. adieu, good mr. depression.", "celia i'm going to talk to him like i'm an insolent boy, so i can play a trick on him. can you hear me, forester?", "very well. what do you want?", "please, what's the hour?", "you should ask me what time of day it is, instead. there's no clock here in the forest.", "then there must be no lovers in the forest, either, because they're as good as a clock, marking the lazy foot of time with a sigh every minute and a groan every hour."], ["why didn't you say \"the swift steps\" of time instead of the \"lazy foot\"? wouldn't that have been just as appropriate?", "no, not at all, sir. time travels at different speeds for different people. i can tell you who time strolls for, who it trots for, who it gallops for, and who it stops cold for.", "okay, who does it trot for?", "well, it trots for a young woman between the time she gets engaged and the time she marries: the time that's passed may only be a week, but it always feels like seven years.", "who does time amble for?", "for a priest who doesn't know his latin or a rich man who is free from the gout. the one sleeps easily because he isn't up late studying and the other lives merrily because he's free from pain. the first lacks the burden of intense, exhausting study, and the second is spared the burden of heavy, exhausting poverty. time ambles for both men.", "who does it gallop for?", "for a thief on his way to the gallows. such a man walks as slowly as possible and, even so, gets there too soon.", "who does it stand still for?", "for lawyers on vacation, because they sleep their holidays away, with no sense of how time moves."], ["where do you live, pretty young man?", "with this shepherdess, my sister, on the outskirts of the forest. we live like fringe on the edges of a petticoat.", "were you born here?", "just like the rabbit, who lives where she is born.", "your speech is more refined than i would expect in such a remote place as this.", "many people have told me so. actually, an old religious uncle of mine taught me how to speak, and he was brought up in the city. he knew too much about courtship, because he fell in love back there, and when he came here he constantly lectured against it. thank god i'm not a woman and afflicted with all the giddiness that troubles that entire sex.", "what were the primary evils he claimed women were guilty of?", "there were no primary ones. all of women's faults are as alike as one half-pence is to another. each of a woman's faults seems monstrous until you're presented with the next one, which is just as bad.", "please, tell me some of them."], ["no, i won't give my medicine away to anyone but the sick. there's a man haunting this forest who abuses the trees by carving \"rosalind\" on their barks. he hangs his odes on the hawthorns and his elegies on the brambles each of these poems praising to the heavens one \"rosalind.\" now if i could find this man, this dream-catcher, i would give him some good advice, because he is truly love-sick.", "well, i'm the man you're speaking of. please, tell me your cure.", "but you don't have any of the symptoms my uncle told me about. he taught me how to recognize a man in love, and you're not a prisoner of love, i'm sure.", "what did he say the symptoms were?", "a thin face, which you don't have; a sleepless, sunken eye, which you don't have; an irritable temper, which you don't have; a neglected beard, which you don't have but that might not be so telling, since you don't have much beard anyway. your stockings should be falling down around your ankles, your hat flying off your head, your sleeves unbuttoned, your shoes untied, and everything about you demonstrating carelessness and misery. but you're no such man. you're so neat and well put-together that you look like you love yourself more than anyone else.", "young boy, i wish i could make you believe that i'm in love."], ["make me believe it? you might as well make the one you love believe it, which she's more likely to do than admit that she does that's one of the ways that women fool their own consciences. but really, are you the one who's been hanging on the trees those poems that speak so admiringly of rosalind?", "i swear to you by rosalind's own pretty hand that i am that unfortunate man.", "are you really as in love as your poems declare?", "neither rhyme nor reason can express how much i love her.", "love is merely a form of insanity, and i tell you, lovers deserve the nuthouse just like crazy people do. the only reason they don't get punished and cured is that the disease is so commonplace that the nuthouse nurses are usually suffering from it, too. but i promise it can be cured with some guidance.", "have you ever cured anyone this way before?"], ["yes, one, and this is how i did it. he had to imagine that i was the girl he was in love with. i made him woo me every day. when he did, being the changeable boy i am, i'd mope, act effeminate, switch moods, long for him, like him, be proud and standoffish, be dreamy, full of mannerisms, unpredictable, full of tears and then smiles; be passionate about everything, then nothing. most boys and women act just like this. i'd like him one minute and despise him the next; cry for him, then spit at him until finally i drove love out and anger in. he abandoned the world, and hid himself away in a monastery. so i cured him, and i'll cure you just the same, leaving you as clean as a sheep's heart, without one spot of love in you.", "i don't want to be cured, boy.", "i could cure you, if you just called me rosalind and came by my cottage every day to woo me.", "by my faith in love, i will, then. tell me where you live.", "come with me, i'll show you, and along the way, you can tell me where you live. will you come?", "wholeheartedly, good young man.", "no, you have to call me rosalind. sister, you're coming?"], ["come on, sweet audrey. i'll get your goats, audrey. well now, what do you think, audrey? am i the man for you, audrey? do my simple features please you?", "your features, god help us! what features?", "well, i'm out here with you and your , in the same way that the witty poet ovid was abandoned to the barbaric goths.", "oh, knowledge put to such bad use is worse than a god cooped up in a hut.", "when a man's jokes fall that flat, it's as depressing as getting a large bill for a short stay in a little room. really, audrey, i wish you were more poetical.", "i don't know what \"poetical\" means. is it \"chaste in word and action\"? does it mean being truthful?", "not really, for the truest poetry is often the most artificial. lovers are fond of poetry and often concoct great lies in their poems.", "but you still wish the gods had made me poetical?", "i do, in fact. right now you swear to me that you are a virgin; if you were a poet, i might have some hope you were lying."], ["what, you don't want me to be chaste?", "not really, unless you were ugly. chastity and beauty together in one woman is like sweetening sugar with honey.", "a sensible fool.", "well, i'm not beautiful, so i hope that i can at least be chaste.", "yes, but wasting chastity on a dirty slut is like putting good meat in a dirty dish.", "i'm not a slut i keep myself clean but i thank god i am ugly.", "well, praise the lord you're ugly. maybe sluttishness will follow. be that as it may, i'm going to marry you. to that end, i've spoken with sir oliver martext, the vicar from the next village, and he's promised to meet us here and marry us.", "this i'd like to see.", "well, god bless this marriage!", "amen. you know, some men, who have fear in their hearts, might falter at this point. after all, these woods aren't a proper , and there's no congregation here but horned animals. but who cares? i'll be brave. horns may be hateful, but they're also necessary. they say, \"many a man doesn't know the full extent of what he owns.\" exactly: many a man will see no end to the horns his wife furnishes him with."], ["well, that's what the wife brings to the marriage. he didn't do anything to get them. horns? well, there they are. only for poor men? no, no. the nobleman's are as huge as the underfed villager's. is the single man lucky, then? no. just as a town protected by a wall around it is worth more than a low-lying village, a married man's horned forehead is more honorable than a bachelor's bare forehead. just as it's better to be skilled at self-defense than it is to avoid fighting, it's better to risk a horn by marrying. here comes sir oliver.", "sir oliver martext, we're glad to see you. will you marry us here, under this tree, or should we follow you to your chapel?", "is there anyone to give the bride away?", "i don't want to take another man's second-hand goods.", "no, someone has to give her away or the marriage isn't legal.", "go on, proceed i'll give her away.", "good evening, mr. what'shisname. how are you, sir? we're glad to see you. god bless you for being here. i'm very glad to see you. this is just a trifling matter here, sir. no, no, put your hat back on.", "do you want to get married, fool?"], ["just as the ox has his yoke, the horse its bridle, the falcon a tether, a man has his desires to keep in check.", "and, being a man of your breeding, you're going to be married under some shrubs like a beggar? get yourself to a church and have a proper priest, who can tell you what marriage is all about, marry you. this man here will slap you two together like two pieces of wood panelling. then one of you will warp and pull away and there goes your marriage.", "i'd rather have this guy marry us, because he is not likely to marry us well, and if we're not married properly, i'll have a better excuse later to leave my wife.", "come with me and let me advise you.", "come, sweet audrey. we have to be married properly. otherwise, we'll be living in sin. goodbye, sir oliver. we're not singing,", "it doesn't matter to me. none of these deranged rascals can shake me from my profession."], ["don't talk to me. i'm going to cry.", "go ahead if you want, but remember that crying doesn't suit a man.", "but don't i have good reason to cry?", "as good a reason as any. so go ahead and cry.", "i mean, his is even red the same color as that lying judas.", "no, it's a shade browner than but his kisses are just like judas's.", "no, really, his hair is a nice color.", "a very good color, this chestnut.", "his kiss is as holy as bread blessed by a priest.", "he must have bought a cast-iron pair of lips: an elderly nun isn't anymore devoted in her kissing than he is. his kiss is cold and chaste.", "but why would he promise to come visit me this morning and then not come?"], ["really, he's a total liar.", "do you think so?", "yes. he's not a pickpocket or a horse thief, but when it comes to truth in love, he's as hollow as a cup or a nut hollowed out by a worm.", "you think his feelings aren't true?", "oh, i think they are when he's in love. but he's not in love.", "but you heard him swear up and down that he was.", "he \"was,\" but that doesn't mean he is anymore. besides, the promises of a lover are as untrustworthy as a bartender handing you an inflated tab: they both swear to their lies. he's staying in the forest with your father now.", "i met my father in the woods yesterday and had a long conversation with him. he asked me who my parents were, and i told him they were as good as he was. he laughed at that and let me go. but why are we talking about my father, when a man like orlando exists?", "oh, sure, he's a brave man! he writes brave poems, speaks brave words, makes brave promises, and then breaks them just as bravely. he's like a cowardly , who breaks his lance across his opponent's shield, rather than directly against it. but everything's brave that a young man does and foolishness leads."], ["who's coming here?", "mistress and master, you've often asked about that lovelorn shepherd you once saw me sitting with, the one who complained about the disdainful shepherdess he was in love with.", "yes, what about him?", "if you'd like to see a scene played out between a man growing pale with unrequited love and a woman glowing with scorn and proud disdain, come with me a short distance and you'll witness it.", "celia come on, let's go. the sight of lovers nourishes whoever else is in love. corin bring us to this little show, and i'll take a part in their play."], ["sweet phoebe, do not scorn me. do not, phoebe. go ahead and say you don't love me, but not so bitterly. the executioner, who's seen death so much his heart has grown hard, still says, \"forgive me\" before he drops the axe on the criminal's neck. are you going to be crueler than the man who makes his living by killing?", "i don't want to be your executioner: i'm trying to avoid you so that i won't hurt you. you tell me my eyes are murderous that's a very pretty sentiment, and oh-so-probable, that my frail, soft eyes (which are so cowardly that they close their gates against dust) are tyrants, butchers, and murderers. i'm frowning at you with all my might right now. if my eyes can injure, let them kill you now. go ahead. faint, fall down if you don't, then you're lying about my eyes being murderers. come on, show me the wound that my eyes have caused. if you get scratched with a pin, it leaves a scar; even if you lean on a rush, it leaves an impression on your palm. but my eyes, which i've darted at you, haven't even left a mark. now i am sure that eyes can't hurt a person."], ["oh, darling phoebe, if you ever fall in love with some fresh face, then you'll know about the invisible wounds that love's sharp arrows can make.", "well, until that time, don't come near me. and when that time comes, then you can mock me, but please don't pity me, because i won't pity you.", "and why, please tell me? is your mother a goddess that you would insult a wretched man, and exult over the injury you've caused him, all at the same time? you're not beautiful really, you're not so pretty that you could go to bed with the lights on so why must you act so proud and pitiless? wait a minute, what's going on? why are you looking at me like that? i don't see anything in you but nature's usual handiwork. oh, for god's sake, i think she also wants me to fall in love with her. no, proud woman, don't hope for that. not even your black eyebrows, your silky black hair, your beady black eyeballs, or your yellowish-white complexion can make me worship you. you foolish shepherd: why are you following her, raining tears and puffing hot air like a foggy south wind? you are a thousand times better than she. it's fools like you who, marrying badly, fill the world with ugly children. it's not her mirror but you who insists she's beautiful. the image of herself that she gets from you is better than her actual features."], ["but mistress, know yourself. get down on your knees and thank heaven for sending you such a good man. i'm telling you, as a friend, that you should sell while the market's good you're not going to have many more buyers. ask this man's forgiveness, love him, and accept his offer. you're already ugly, don't make matters worse by being scornful, too. so take her, shepherd, and god bless you.", "sweet boy, i'd rather hear you scold me for a whole year than this man woo me for a minute.", "he's fallen in love with your sheer ugliness. silvius and i think she's falling in love with my anger. if i'm right, as soon as she answers you with frowns, i'll rebuke her with bitter words. phoebe why are you looking at me like that?", "i don't wish you any harm.", "i'm telling you, don't fall in love with me. i'm more false than the promises a man makes while drunk. besides, i don't like you. if you'd like to know where i live, my house is in the olive grove close by. come on, sister. shepherd, keep working on her. come on, sister. shepherdess, give him another chance. and don't be proud. the whole world could look at you, and no one would be as blind as he is, thinking you're beautiful. come on, to our sheep.", "dead , now i understand what you meant when you said, \"you've never loved until you've fallen in love at first sight.\""], ["sweet phoebe", "what? did you say something, silvius?", "sweet phoebe, have pity on me.", "well, i'm sorry for you, gentle silvius.", "but if you're really sorry for me, you can cure me. if you're sorry for the grief i feel in loving you, you can love me back. then both my grief and your sorrow will be cured.", "you have my friendship. isn't that enough?", "i want you.", "well, that's just greedy. silvius, i used to hate you. i still don't love you, but since you're well-spoken when it comes to love, i'll keep you around and make use of you. but don't expect any more than that.", "my love for you is so pure and perfect, and i'm in such a bad way, that i'll be grateful for whatever leftover love you throw my way. every once in a while, toss me a distracted smile, and i'll live on that.", "do you know the boy who was just speaking to me?"], ["not very well, but i've met him several times. he's bought the cottage and the grounds that the old peasant used to own.", "don't think i'm in love with him just because i'm asking about him. he's an irritable boy, though he speaks well. but what do i care about words? and yet, words are a good thing when the man speaking them is pleasant to listen to. he's good-looking, but not too good-looking. he's awfully proud, but his pride suits him. he'll grow up to be a proper man. the best thing about him is his complexion: as fast as he offends me with words, his pretty face heals the wound. he's not very tall, but he's tall enough for his age. his legs aren't great, but they're alright. his lips were nice and red, a little more lively and passionate than the red that was in his cheeks one was pure red and the other more pink. there are women out there, silvius, who would have nearly fallen in love with him after inspecting him as closely as i have. but i don't love him or hate him though i suppose i have more reason to hate him than love him. what right did he have to scold me like that? he said my eyes and my hair were black and, now that i think of it, he scorned me. i'm surprised i didn't bite back. but no matter i'll get back at him soon enough. i'll write him a taunting letter, and you can deliver it. will you do that for me, silvius?", "with all my heart, phoebe."], ["i'll write it right now the whole thing is pressing on my mind, and on my heart. i'll be bitter toward him, and curt. come with me, silvius."], ["please, pretty young man, i'd like to get to know you better.", "they say you are a melancholy fellow.", "i am. i like it better than laughing.", "people who are either too serious or too silly are awful. they make themselves targets for ridicule even faster than drunks do.", "well, i think it's good to be serious and keep quiet.", "in that case it's good to be a post.", "i'm not a scholar's kind of melancholy, which is all about impressing one's peers, or a musician's, which comes from his passion for his art. i don't have the proud melancholy of a courtier or the ambitious melancholy of a soldier or the calculated melancholy of a lawyer. my melancholy is not like a lady's which is nothing more than an affectation nor like a lover's, which combines all of these qualities. my melancholy is purely my own a compound made from many ingredients. i'm serious because i've traveled so much. when i think about all the things i've seen, i sink into deep thoughts."], ["you're a traveler. well then, you have good reason to be sad. i'm afraid you've sold your own land to see other men's. to have seen much but own nothing is to have rich eyes and poor hands.", "not true. i gained my experience.", "and your experience makes you sad. i'd rather have a jester to make me happy than experience to make me sad and to travel for all that trouble, no less!", "good day and happiness to you, darling rosalind.", "no i'll say goodbye if you're going to talk in .", "goodbye, mr. traveler. make sure to keep up your foreign accent, wear strange clothes, belittle all the benefits you receive from your native land and fall out of love with it, and nearly curse god for making you look like the englishman you are, or else i'll never believe you've paddled in a gondola in a venetian canal, as you say you have.", "rosalind what's going on, orlando? where have you been all this time? and you call yourself a lover? if you ever insult me like this again, don't bother coming around here again.", "my beautiful rosalind, i'm only an hour late."], ["you'd break a date with your beloved by a whole hour? a man who will dare to meet his lover even a thousandth part of a minute late well, it's possible he likes her, but i doubt he really loves the woman.", "forgive me, darling rosalind.", "no, if you're ever late like this again, i'll refuse to see you. i'd rather be wooed by a snail.", "a snail?", "yes, a snail. because even though he's slow, he carries his house on his head a better offer than you can make a woman, i think. besides, he brings his fate with him.", "what fate is that?", "why, his cuckold's horns, of course the kind you men are always blaming on your wives. see, the snail already has its horns, which prevents nasty rumors from spreading about his wife's infidelity.", "a virtuous woman won't give her husband horns, and my rosalind is definitely virtuous.", "and i am your rosalind.", "he likes calling you that, but he's got another rosalind out there with a prettier face."], ["come on, woo me, woo me. i'm in a good mood now and likely to give you what you want. what would you say to me now if i really were your precious little rosalind?", "i'd kiss you before i spoke.", "no, it would be better to speak first and kiss only after you've run out of things to say. when good orators finish talking, they spit; when lovers do (god help us if they ever do), they kiss.", "what if she won't kiss me?", "then she's making you beg, and that gives you a whole new set of things to talk about.", "who could be out of things to say if he were with the girl he loves?", "indeed, you would be out if i were your mistress if my chastity is worth as much as my wit.", "would i be out of my ?", "no, you'd still have your clothes on but, yes, i wouldn't think much of you. aren't i your rosalind?"], ["i like to pretend you are, because then it's almost like actually talking to her.", "well, on behalf of rosalind, i'll tell you i don't want you.", "then, on behalf of myself, i'll tell you i'll die.", "no, you won't die yourself, but only by proxy. this world is almost six thousand years old, and in all this time not one man has ever actually died from love. may have wanted to die from love, and he's now considered one of the great, tragic love heroes, but, in fact, a greek with a club beat his brains out. it had nothing to do with love. leander would have lived many more years if it hadn't been for a particularly hot summer night, when he went swimming in the hellespont, got a cramp, and drowned. the foolish poets of the time insisted he died for love, but they're lying. all the love stories are lies. men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not because of love.", "i hope rosalind doesn't feel as you do. her frown alone would kill me.", "no, her frown wouldn't kill a fly. but come on, now i'll play your rosalind, and in a more friendly state of mind. whatever you ask for, i'll give.", "then love me, rosalind.", "okay, i will on fridays and saturdays, and the rest.", "and will you have me?"], ["sure, and twenty others just like you.", "what's that?", "well, aren't you a good man?", "i hope so.", "and can a person ever have too much of a good thing? come on, sister, you can be the priest and marry us. give me your hand, orlando. what do you say, sister?", "please, marry us.", "i can't say the .", "you just have to say, \"do you, orlando \"", "oh, stop it. do you, orlando, take rosalind to be your lawfully wedded wife?", "i do.", "okay, but when?", "right now; as fast as she can say the vows.", "then you have to say, \"i take you, rosalind, to be my lawfully wedded wife.\"", "i take you, rosalind, to be my lawfully wedded wife."], ["maybe i should ask you what right you have to take me, but i'll take you, orlando, to be my husband. look, i've sped ahead of the priest and answered the question before he even asked. a woman's thoughts are always running ahead of her actions.", "so do all thoughts. they have wings.", "now tell me how long you intend to keep her.", "forever and a day.", "you might as well just say for \"a day,\" and forget the \"ever\" part. no, orlando, men are like april when they're wooing a girl young, and passionate but like december once they're married and their passions have cooled. women are as sweet and temperate as springtime when they're single, but the climate changes once they're married. i'll be more jealous of you than a wild rooster over his hen; more noisy than a parrot chattering about the rain; more fond of new things than an ape; more giddy about getting what i want than a monkey. i'll cry at nothing, and i'll always do it when you're in a good mood. and when you want to go to sleep, i'll be up laughing like a hyena.", "but will my rosalind do this, too?", "indeed, she'll act just like me.", "but she is wise."], ["right. if she weren't wise, she wouldn't be smart enough to behave badly. the wiser the woman, the wilder. if you close the doors on a woman's wit, it'll fly out the window. if you shut the windows, it will pour out the keyhole. if you stop up the keyhole, it will escape from the chimney along with the smoke.", "a man with a wife like that might ask, \"hey, wandering wit, where are you off to?\"", "nah, better save the questions for when you find her in your neighbor's bed.", "and what wit could excuse ?", "she'll say she was at the neighbor's looking for you. you'll never find her without an answer unless you find her without a tongue. a woman who doesn't know how to make her own indiscretions look like her husband's fault is hardly a woman. and she's hardly fit to be a mother her child will turn out to be a fool.", "rosalind, i have to leave you for two hours.", "oh, no! darling, i can't live without you for two hours.", "i must join the duke for lunch. i'll be back here with you by two o'clock.", "oh, go, leave me. i knew you'd turn out this way. my friends told me as much, and i knew it, too. but i was won over by your flattering words. i'm just another girl whom you've cast aside. so, take me, death! you'll be back at two o'clock?"], ["yes, sweet rosalind.", "honestly, truly, in god's name, and by all those little girly oaths that don't actually have any power, if you break even a little bit of your promise, or if you come even a minute after two o'clock, i'll think you the most pathetic promise breaker, the most lying lover, and the most unworthy partner for rosalind that could be found anywhere. so beware of my contempt, and keep your promise.", "i'll keep my promise just as if you really were rosalind. so, goodbye.", "well, time is the old judge that tries your kind of criminal. time will tell what kind of a man you are. goodbye.", "you have absolutely abused our sex in this love talk of yours. we should rip off your man's clothing and show the world the woman who has represented her own kind so badly.", "oh cousin, cousin, cousin, my sweet little cousin, i wish you knew how deep in love i am. the bottom of my love is so deep it can't be reached. it's as deep as the bay of portugal.", "or it's bottomless, at least: pour affection in one end, and it runs out the other."], ["cupid that blind bastard son of venus, conceived from a thought and anger, born from insanity, that blind, naughty boy who makes everyone else go blind just because he can't see himself let cupid judge how deep my love runs. i'm telling you, aliena, i can't stand being apart from orlando. i'm going to find some shade and sigh until he returns.", "and i'm going to sleep."], ["which one of you killed the deer?", "it was me, sir.", "let's bring this man to the duke, like a triumphant roman conqueror. put the deer's horns on his head, like a victory branch. do you have a song, forester, for this occasion?", "yes, sir.", "then sing it. it doesn't matter if it's in tune so long as it's loud enough.", "lords"], ["what do you say now? isn't it past two o'clock? and i see a lot of orlando here.", "i'm telling you, he's taken his bow and arrows and, with a pure love and a worried brain, has gone to take a nap.", "look who's coming.", "rosalind i've been sent to find you, young man. my lovely phoebe told me to give you this letter. i don't know what's in it, but guessing from her stern expression and her wasp-like demeanor as she was writing it, i bet she's angry. you'll have to excuse me, as i'm just the messenger.", "patience herself would be shocked by this letter and become feisty. if i can take this, i can take anything. she says i'm not handsome and have no manners. she says i'm arrogant and that she couldn't love me even if men were as rare as the mythical phoenix. honestly! i'm not hunting after her love. why would she write this way to me? tell the truth, shepherd: you wrote this letter.", "no, i swear, i don't even know what's in it. phoebe wrote it."], ["come on, you're a fool, and driven to extreme measures by love. i saw her hands: they were as rough as leather and just as brown; i thought she was wearing old gloves, but they were, in fact, her hands. these are the hands of a hard-working housewife, but that's not the point. the point is that she didn't write this letter. these are a man's words, and his handwriting.", "i'm telling you, it's hers.", "well, it's written in a boisterous and rude style someone is up for a fight. why, she challenges me like a muslim would challenge a christian. no, a woman's gentle brain could never have come up with such crude expressions and even harsher meanings. do you want to hear what she says?", "if you want to read it, as i haven't heard it yet, though i've heard too much of phoebe's cruelty.", "she's phoebe-ing me. listen to what the tyrant says. \"are you a god disguised as a shepherd, that you know so expertly how to burn my heart?\" now, honestly, would a woman rant like this?", "you call that ranting?", "\"why have you set aside your divine nature just to battle with a woman's affections?\" did you ever hear such ranting? \"when other men have wooed me, they didn't hurt me.\" in other words, she thinks i'm not a man, but an animal."], ["\"if the scorn in your bright eyes can make me fall so deeply in love, can you imagine what power they might have if they looked at me more kindly? while you sneered at me, i loved you. consider what effect kind prayers might have. the man that brings you this letter doesn't know how i feel about you. send me your answer via him. tell me via him whether you will accept my faithful offer of myself and all that i can do. or tell him you will deny my love, in which case i'll figure out how to die.\"", "you call this sneering?", "oh, you poor shepherd!", "why do you pity him? he doesn't deserve any pity. silvius why would you love such a woman? so she can turn you into an instrument and play lousy tunes on you? it's unbearable. well, go back to her i can tell she's turned you into a perfectly tame snake and tell her this: if she loves me, i command her to love you. and if she won't love you, tell her i'll never take her unless you beg me to. if you're a true lover, get out of here. no, don't say another word, because here comes more company.", "good morning, pretty ones. tell me, if you know: where in this forest is there a shepherd's cottage surrounded by olive trees?"], ["west of here, in the valley next to us. passing by on your right, there is a row of willows. follow them straight to the cottage. but right now, the house is keeping to itself there's no one home.", "i think i recognize you from a description i was given of your clothing and age: \"the boy is pretty and feminine, and carries himself like a blooming young woman. the woman is short, with a darker complexion than her brother.\" aren't you the owners of the house i was just asking about?", "since you asked, i suppose it's not bragging to say that we are.", "orlando sends his regards to you both, and he sends this bloody handkerchief to the boy he calls \"his rosalind.\" is that you?", "it is. what does this mean?", "it's a story that involves some shame on my part. it's about who i am, and how, why, and where this handkerchief was stained.", "please, tell us."], ["when young orlando left you last, he promised to return within an hour. he was pacing through the forest, thinking bittersweet thoughts of love, and listen what happened! he looked to the side, and pay attention to what he saw then: under an oak tree whose lower branches were mossy with age and top branches ancient and brittle he saw a wretched beggar, with overgrown hair and beard, asleep on his back. a green and gold snake had wound itself around this man's neck and was slowly making its way toward the man's mouth. however, when it saw orlando, it unwound itself and slunk away into a bush. but there happened to be a lioness crouching under that bush. her cubs had nursed from her until she was dry, so she was ravenously hungry, and she was lying with her head on the ground, watching the man as cats do and waiting to see if he would wake up a lion won't prey on anything that seems dead. seeing the lioness, orlando approached the sleeping man. he discovered that the man was his older brother.", "oh, i've heard him talk about that brother, and he described him as the most inhumane man alive.", "and he was right. i know exactly how inhumane he was.", "but, back to orlando, did he leave his brother there, to be food for the hungry mother-lioness?"], ["he turned away twice and almost left him there. but his kindness was nobler than even his desire for revenge, his natural goodness was stronger than his need to give his brother what he deserved. he fought the lioness and quickly defeated her. i woke from my miserable sleep when i heard the noise of their struggle.", "are you his brother?", "was it you that he rescued?", "was it you that was always plotting to kill him?", "that was me, but it's not me i'm not ashamed to tell you what i once was, since i'm so happy to have since converted.", "but what about the bloody handkerchief?", "i'll get there. when we had told each other our entire stories and cried, and i'd told him how i'd ended up in in the forest well, he brought me to the duke, who gave me fresh clothing and hospitality, and put me in my brother's care. my brother immediately took me to his cave, where he took off his clothing and there on his arm was a wound where the lioness had attacked him, ripping off some of his flesh. the wound had been bleeding the entire time. so, now he fainted, and as he fainted, he called out, \"rosalind!\" quickly, i resuscitated him and bound up his wound. after a brief time as he is a strong, brave man"], ["he sent me out to find you, even though i'm a stranger to you. he wanted me to tell you this story and beg your forgiveness for his having broken his promise. he wanted me to give this handkerchief, soaked in his blood, to the boy that he jokingly calls his rosalind.", "oh no! ganymede! ganymede, sweetheart?", "many people faint when they see blood.", "there's more to it than that. ganymede!", "look, he's recovering.", "i want to go home.", "we'll take you there. please, will you take his arm?", "buck up, boy! you're a man? you don't have a man's courage.", "it's true, i confess. oh, sir, someone would think i was a good fake. please tell your brother what a convincing show i put on. whoo-hoo!", "that was no show. your cheeks are too flushed for me to believe that was a fake faint.", "fake, i'm telling you.", "well, then, be brave and pretend to be a man."], ["that's what i'm doing. but honestly, i should have been a woman.", "come on, you keep getting paler. please, let's go home. sir, please come with us.", "i'll do that, because i have to tell my brother how you forgave him, rosalind.", "i'll think of something. but please, tell him how well i faked a faint. will you come with us?"], ["we'll get married at some point, audrey. be patient.", "really, the priest was good enough, no matter what that old guy said.", "no, he was wicked and vile. but audrey, there's a boy in the forest who claims you're his girl.", "yes, i know who you're talking about, but he has no claim on me.", "here comes the man himself.", "it warms my heart to encounter such a country bumpkin. truly, we witty men can't hold our tongues. we have to mess with the likes of him, we just can't help it.", "good evening, audrey.", "good evening, william.", "and good evening to you, sir.", "good evening to you, good friend. no, no, put your hat back on, put it back on. no, please, keep your head covered. how old are you, friend?"], ["twenty-five, sir.", "a mature age. is your name william?", "yes, it's william, sir.", "a good name. were you born here in the forest?", "yes sir, thank god.", "\"thank god\" that's a good answer. are you rich?", "well, so-so.", "\"so-so\" is good, very good, an excellent answer. and then again, it's not so good, but only so-so. are you wise?", "yes sir, i'm fairly witty.", "well, that's a fine answer. i seem to remember a saying: \"only a fool thinks he's wise; the knows that he is, in fact, a fool.\" when one self-described philosopher wanted to eat grapes, he opened his lips when they entered his mouth, thereby making the theoretical point that grapes were made to be eaten, and lips to open. do you love this girl?", "i do, sir.", "give me your hand. are you educated?", "no, sir."], ["then learn this from me: if you have something, you have it. everyone knows that when you pour a drink out of a cup and into a glass, the cup becomes empty. and all the authorities know that is latin for \"he.\" you are no longer , because i am he.", "which he, sir?", "why, the he that will marry this woman. therefore, idiot, abandon (or, in common language, \"leave\") the society (which in the boorish tongue is \"company\") of this female maybe you'll get it if i say \"woman,\" instead. say it all at once, now: abandon the society of this female, or, simpleton, you'll perish. let me put it in a way you'll understand: you'll die. or, rather, i'll kill you, or i'll do away with you, or i'll turn your life into death and your freedom into captivity. i'll poison you, or beat you with a club, or stab you with a sword. i'll bandy you about and overwhelm you with my cleverness. i will, in other words, kill you in three hundred and fifty ways. therefore, tremble with fear and leave.", "do what he says, william.", "farewell, sir.", "our master and mistress are looking for you. let's go.", "hurry up, audrey, hurry. i'm coming, i'm coming."], ["is it really possible that you could like her right after meeting her? and fall in love with her after merely seeing her? and as soon as you fall in love, with her, woo her? and as soon as you woo her, have her accept? and do you really mean to marry her?", "don't question the foolish haste of it all or her poverty or our short time together or the abruptness of my courtship or the abruptness of her consent but say with me, \"i love aliena.\" and say with me that she loves me. agree to this match, so we can enjoy each other. it will be to your advantage, because i'll leave our father's house and all his property to you, while i live and die a shepherd here in the forest.", "you have my consent. you can be married tomorrow if you want. i'll invite the duke and all of his followers. go get aliena ready because, look, here comes my rosalind.", "hello, brother.", "and hello to you, fair sister.", "oh, darling orlando, it's so hard to see you wearing your heart in a sling."], ["actually, it's my arm.", "i thought your heart had been wounded by a lion's claws.", "my heart been wounded, but by a lady, not a lion.", "did your brother tell you how well i pretended to faint when he showed me the handkerchief?", "yes, and he told me some things that were even more amazing.", "oh, i know what you're talking about. it's true: it was as sudden as two rams rushing at each other, and as quick as julius caesar's \"i came, i saw, i conquered.\" your brother and my sister had no sooner met than they gave each other a good once over; they had no sooner looked at each other than they fell in love; no sooner fell in love than they sighed; no sooner sighed than they asked each other why they had sighed; no sooner answered than they sought a solution. and in this way, degree by degree, they've built a staircase toward marriage. and they had better climb those stairs immediately, or else they'll end up in bed before they ought to. they're in the heat of passion; they simply have to be together. you couldn't beat the two of them apart.", "they'll be married tomorrow, and i'll invite the duke to the ceremony. but, oh, it makes me bitter to look at happiness through another man's eyes. tomorrow i'll be at the depths of my misery thinking about the happiness my brother has achieved, in having what he wished for."], ["well then, can't i act as rosalind for you tomorrow?", "i can't live by pretending anymore.", "i won't exhaust you anymore with idle chitchat. you should know that i think you're a smart man. i really mean it. i'm not telling you this so you'll think well of me (who wouldn't think well of someone who thought well of him, after all?) and i'm not trying to enhance my own reputation, but only to do you good. believe me, then, that i have special powers. since i was three years old, i've been in contact with a powerful but virtuous magician no black magic here. if you love rosalind as much as you say you do, you will marry her when your brother marries aliena. i know where she is and, if you don't mind, i will set her before you tomorrow, whole and unharmed.", "are you serious?", "i swear on my life, which i take pretty seriously, even if i am a magician. so put on your best clothes and tell your friends to come. because if you want to be married tomorrow, you will, and if you want to be married to rosalind, you will.", "look, here comes someone who loves me, along with someone who loves her.", "young man, it was very rude of you to show him the letter i wrote you."], ["i don't care. i'm being contemptuous and cruel toward you on purpose. a faithful shepherd worships you. why don't you pay attention to him? why don't you love him? he adores you.", "silvius, tell this youth what it means to be in love.", "it means being full of sighs and tears, like i am for phoebe.", "and like i am for ganymede.", "and like i am for rosalind.", "and like i am for no woman.", "it means being faithful and ready to serve, just like i am for phoebe.", "and like i am for ganymede.", "and like i am for rosalind.", "and like i am for no woman.", "it means being filled with fantasy; with passion and wishes; with adoration, loyalty, and devotion. it means being humble, being patient, being impatient, being pure, being put-upon, being obedient. just as i am for phoebe.", "and i for ganymede.", "and i for rosalind."], ["and i for no woman.", "since you know all this is true, why do you blame me for loving you?", "and why do you blame me for loving you?", "and why do you blame me for loving you?", "who are you talking to?", "i'm saying it to the girl who isn't here and doesn't hear me.", "all right, stop this. you sound like a pack of wolves howling at the moon. silvius i'll help you, if i can. phoebe if i could love you, i would. all of you, meet me here tomorrow. phoebe if i'm ever going to marry a woman, i'll marry you. and i getting married tomorrow. orlando if i will ever satisfy a man, i'll satisfy you. and you will get married tomorrow. silvius if the thing you desire will make you happy, i'll make you happy. and you'll get married tomorrow. orlando by the love you have for rosalind, come back tomorrow. silvius by the love you have for phoebe, come here tomorrow. and by my love for no woman, i'll also be here tomorrow. so, goodbye for now. you all know what to do.", "as long as i'm alive, i'll be here.", "me too.", "me too."], ["tomorrow is the happy day, audrey. we'll be married tomorrow.", "i can't wait. i hope it doesn't make me unchaste that i really want to be a married woman.", "here come two of duke senior's pages.", "good afternoon, good gentleman.", "it really is good to see you. come, sit, sit, and sing me a song.", "sounds good to us. sit between us.", "should we just get down to it? should we skip all that hacking and spitting and saying that we're hoarse, which only makes clear what lousy singers we are?", "yes, yes, and let's sing in unison, like two gypsies riding on a single horse.", ""], ["", "really, young men, though it wasn't a very hard song to get right, the music was still all out of tune.", "no, sir, you're wrong; we kept the time, we didn't lose any.", "oh, yes you did i lost time listening to your foolish song. god be with you, and i hope he fixes your voices! come on, audrey."], ["orlando, do you really believe that this boy can do everything he's promised?", "sometimes i do and sometimes i don't. i'm afraid of hoping, but i hope anyway.", "be patient for a bit longer while i go over the terms of our agreement. ( duke senior you say that if i bring rosalind here, you will give her to orlando in marriage?", "yes, even if i had whole kingdoms to give along with her.", "orlando and you promise to marry her, when i bring her here?", "i will, even if i were king of all kingdoms.", "phoebe and you say you'll marry me, if i'm willing to marry you?", "yes, even if i die an hour later.", "but if you decide not to marry me, you'll marry this faithful shepherd instead?"], ["that's the deal.", "silvius and you agree to marry phoebe, if she is willing?", "even if marrying her meant i died.", "i've promised to make everything right. duke senior, keep your promise to give away your daughter. orlando, keep your promise to marry his daughter. phoebe, keep your promise to marry me, and to marry this shepherd if you choose to refuse me. silvius, keep your promise to marry phoebe if she refuses me. i'll leave now, to set all these things right.", "this shepherd boy reminds me quite vividly of my daughter.", "my lord, when i first saw him i thought he was your daughter's brother. but, my lord, this boy was born in the forest and has been schooled not in the usual subjects but only in magic. his uncle, who the boy says is a great magician and lives concealed within the boundaries of this forest, taught him."], ["well, look: there must be another coming, with these couples also on their way to noah's ark. here comes a pair of those strange creatures called \"fools\" in any language.", "hello, and greetings to you all.", "my lord, welcome this man. this is the jester i have met so many times in the forest. he swears he used to be a courtier.", "if anyone doubts this, let him put me on trial. i have danced a round, i have flattered a lady, i have been polite with my friends, smooth and cunning with my enemies. i have bankrupted three tailors. i have quarreled four times, and almost got in a fight.", "and how was that one settled?", "well, we almost fought and then realized that we had reached the seventh cause.", "what do you mean, the seventh cause? ( duke senior my good lord, i hope you like this fellow.", "i like him very well."], ["god bless you, sir. i want the same thing as all these other people. i've come here to be married, like all these other would-be couples. this poor virgin isn't much to look at, sir, but she's mine. it's a strange habit of mine to take the thing that no one else wants: virginity in an ugly girl is like a rich man living in a broken-down house or a pearl in the hideous oyster.", "really, he's very witty, and full of wise sayings.", "his wittiness, a sweet disease, is here one minute and gone the next, sir, as with most fools.", "but back to that argument you mentioned. what's the \"seventh cause\"?", "our argument went through seven stages watch your posture, audrey. it went like this. i didn't like the way a particular courtier had cut his beard. he sent me word that, whether i liked it or not, he liked it fine. they call this \"the courteous retort.\" if i repeat that it isn't cut well, and he responds that he isn't trying to please me, just himself, with his beard. they call this \" the modest quip.\" if i say again it is poorly cut, and he responds that my judgment is no good, they call this \"the sullen reply.\" if i say yet again that his beard is poorly cut, and he says that i'm not speaking the truth, they call this \"the brave retort.\" one more time i say it's not well cut, and he says i'm lying. they call this \"the argumentative countercheck.\" and so on through \"the circumstantial lie\" and \"the direct lie.\"", "and how many times did you say his beard wasn't cut well?"], ["i didn't dare take it past \"the circumstantial lie,\" and he didn't dare go to the \" ,\" so we compared the lengths of our swords and then ended the fight.", "can you name the steps of that argument again?", "of course, sir. there are rulebooks for arguing just as there are rulebooks for manners. here are the steps. first is \"the courteous retort\"; second, \"the modest quip\"; third, \"the sullen reply\"; fourth, \"the valiant retort\"; fifth, \"the argumentative countercheck\"; sixth, \"the circumstantial lie\"; seventh, \"the direct lie.\" you can avoid getting to that final stage if you can properly use an \"if.\" i once heard of an argument that seven judges couldn't settle. the two parties met up on their own, and one said, \"well, if you said this-and-that, then i must have said such-and-such,\" and they shook hands and parted on good terms. \"if\" is the only peacemaker. \"if\" is a very valuable word.", "isn't he a remarkable fellow, my lord? he's as smart as they come, but just a jester.", "he uses his clownishness to disguise his deadly wit.", "there is laughter in heaven when earthly affairs are put right and people unite."], ["good duke, come receive your daughter. hymen brought her from heaven yes, brought her here.", "duke senior i give myself to you, for i am yours. orlando i give myself to you, for i am yours.", "if my eyes don't deceive me, you are my daughter.", "if my eyes don't deceive me, you are my rosalind.", "if my eyes aren't deceiving me, goodbye, love.", "duke senior if you won't be my father, i won't have any. orlando if you won't be my husband, i won't have any. phoebe if you won't be my wife, i won't have any.", "quiet! stop chattering until i've made everything clear. there are eight people here that i will join in marriage, if the truth you see before you pleases you. orlando rosalind no hardship can part you. oliver celia your hearts are together. phoebe you must consent to having silvius as your husband, unless you'd rather be married to a woman. touchstone audrey you are bound to each other as closely as winter is to bad weather. while we sing a wedding hymn, satisfy your curiosity with questioning. your surprise will fade, and you'll learn how all this came to be."], ["", "my niece, you are welcome here as if you were my own daughter.", "silvius i won't go back on my promise; i'll marry you. you've won me over with your faith.", "let me have your attention for a moment. i'm sir rowland's middle son, and i bring you news. when duke frederick heard that great, worthy men were coming to this forest every day, he raised a large army to invade this land and fight his brother. but just at the edge of the forest, he met an old religious man. he spoke with him for a while and decided not only to abandon his pursuit of his brother but even to retreat from the world. he's giving the throne to his banished brother and restoring all the men he'd exiled to their rightful lands. i swear on my life that i'm speaking the truth."], ["welcome, young man: you bring a great present to your brothers' wedding. to oliver, you return his lands; to orlando, you give a whole dukedom, since he will inherit my land. but first, let's finish the things we started out here. then i'll share the abundance of my returned fortune with all those that have stayed out here with me, according to the rank and status each of you enjoy. but until then, let's forget our nobility and enjoy some fun. music, please. brides and bridegrooms, dance your happiness away.", "wait a minute, sir. do you mean to say that the duke has abandoned the glamorous court to live as a monk?", "yes, he has.", "i will go find him. there is much to be learned from these converts. duke senior i bestow on you your former honor, for your patience and virtue. orlando i give you the love that your faithfulness deserves oliver and you your land, your love, and your great allies. silvius you get a long and well-deserved stay in bed, with your new wife."], ["touchstone and you i expect to be up fighting soon. the honeymoon will last two months, tops. and with that, you may all return to your dancing. i'm bound for another fate.", "stay, jaques, stay here for a bit.", "no, this fun is not for me. i'll wait for you in your cave, where you can tell me what you need from me.", "let's proceed. we'll begin the ceremony the way we hope it will end with delight."], ["you don't usually see a woman deliver an epilogue, but it's no worse than seeing a man deliver the prologue. if it's true that you don't need to sell good wine, then it should also be true that a good play doesn't need an epilogue. but they use good-quality ivy to sell good wine, and a good play is improved by a good epilogue. but then i'm in a strange position, as i not only do not have a good epilogue, i'm not sure this was a good play. i'm not dressed like a beggar, so it wouldn't be becoming for me to beg. no, instead i'll bewitch you, and i'll start with the women. women, in the name of the love you have for men, i demand that you like as much of this play as you feel like. men, in the name of the women you love and i can guess by your goofy smiles that none of you exactly hates them the play will act as a nice toy for you and the to share. if i actually were a woman, i'd kiss all of you that have beards that pleased me, complexions that i liked, and breath that wasn't foul. and i'm sure that all of you with nice beards, good faces, and sweet breath will, when i curtsy good night, give me a nice round of applause."]], [["continue, solinus, and bring on my downfall. give me the death sentence and end all my troubles.", "merchant of syracuse, stop your begging: i'm not inclined to bend our laws. the hatred and discord between our two cities is the result of the bitter offenses your duke has perpetrated against the merchants of ephesus, our well-behaved countrymen. lacking the money to ransom themselves, these merchants were executed under your duke's harsh laws, and this has erased all looks of pity from my face. ever since these deadly conflicts erupted between your violent countrymen and ours, both you syracusians and we ephesians have held serious councils and decided not to permit any travel between our two hostile towns. nothe law goes further: if anyone born in ephesus is seen in syracuse's marketplaces or if anyone born in syracuse comes to ephesus, that man dies, and his possessions will be confiscated by the duke, unless he can raise a thousand marks to pay the penalty and ransom himself. your possessions, even if we calculate their worth very generously, don't even add up to a hundred marks. therefore, by law, you are condemned to die.", "at least i have this comfort: when you finish speaking, my troubles will also end, at sundown."], ["well, syracusian, tell usbrieflywhy you left your hometown and came to ephesus.", "asking me to speak of my unspeakable griefsthat's the hardest task you could impose on me. but i'll do it so that the world can see that it was natural emotion, and not a desire to break the law, that brought me to this fate. i'll tell you whatever my sorrow permits me to say. i was born in syracuse, and i married a womana fortunate woman, except for having been married to me. and yet i would have made her happy had our luck not been so bad. i lived with her in joy, and our wealth increased from the prosperous journeys i frequently made to epidamnum. then my agent died and, obligated to care for my now untended goods abroad, i was drawn away from my wife's fond embraces. i hadn't been gone for six months when my wife, almost fainting with the pains of pregnancy, made arrangements to follow me, and she soon arrived safely where i was. she hadn't been there very long before she became the joyful mother of twin boys. it was strange: they looked so much alike that the only way to tell them apart was by their names. in the same hour, and in the same inn, a poor woman also delivered identical twin boys. their parents had very little, so i bought the boys and raised them as companions and servants for our twin sons. my wife was more than a little proud of our two boys, and every day she would press me to return home. reluctantly, i agreedalas! too quickly, we boarded a ship."], ["we had sailed a away from epidamnum before the sea, which always obeys the winds' commands, gave any indication of danger. we didn't stay hopeful much longer: soon, the sky grew so dark that we were convinced we were going to die immediately. i could have accepted that, but i was forced by my wife's incessant weepingshe wept in advance for the things that she saw aheadand the piteous complaints of the sweet infantswho cried in imitation of the adults, without understanding whyto find a way to save us. here's the best i could do: the crew of our ship had fled for safety in the lifeboats and left us to sink with the ship. my wife, who was very concerned about the younger of our twins, tied him to a spare mastthe kind that sailors use for just such a purpose. she tied one of the other twins to him. i did the same with the remaining two boys. with the children taken care of, my wife and i tied ourselves to opposite ends of the mast and floated off, obedient to the current. it carried us toward corinthor so we thought. eventually the sun, looking down upon the earth, burned off the threatening storm clouds. by the power of the sun's wished-for light, the seas became calm. we saw two ships sailing toward us, one from corinth, the other from epidaurus. but before they reached uslet me say no more! you'll have to imagine what came next, based on what had already happened."], ["no, keep going, old man; don't stop like that. for we may take pity on you, even if we can't pardon you.", "had the gods taken pity on us, i wouldn't be here calling them merciless. the two ships hadn't come within ten leagues of us when our ship hit a huge rock and split down the middle. as we were unjustly separated from each other, both my wife and i were left with something to delight in and something to sorrow over. for her partthe poor soul! her half of the mast weighed less, but she was no luckier than i was: the wind carried her away more quickly. i saw them rescued by fishermen from corinthor so i thought. after a while, another ship rescued me and the two boys who were with me. the sailors knew me, so they took good care of us. our ship would have caught up with the other ship and taken back my wife and the children, but we sailed too slowly and their ship sped toward their home. so now you've heard how i was separated from everything i love. it's been my bad luck to remain alive long enough to be able to tell the sad stories of my own misfortunes.", "and for the sake of those you grieve for, do me a favor: tell me the full story of what has happened to you and them, up to this point.", "my youngest son, whom i care about the most, turned eighteen and started to wonder about his twin brother. he asked me to let him take his attendantwho had also lost a brother, though he had kept his brother's"], ["name for himselfand go in search of him. i wanted to see my lost son as well, so i risked losing the one i loved in order to find the other. i've spent five years in the remotest parts of greece and roaming all over asia. on my way home, i came to ephesus. i have no hope of finding my boys here, but i will check every place that is inhabited by men. but that is where the story of my life must end. i'd be happy to die if, in all my travels, i could prove that they are alive.", "poor egeon! fate has decreed that you must endure the extremes of terrible misfortune. believe me, if it weren't against the law, my crown, my duty, and my position (which princes cannot disobey, not matter how they feel), my very soul would argue your case. but you are sentenced to death, and changing a sentence that's already been passed would dishonor my title. however, i'll do what i can for you. i will allow you one day to look for help in ephesus. call any friends you have. beg or borrow to come up with the ransom. if you can, you live. if not, you are doomed to die. jailer, take him into custody.", "i will.", "hopeless and helpless, i go my way, merely putting off my fatal end."], ["so, tell people that you're from epidamnumotherwise all your goods will be confiscated. just today, a merchant from syracuse was arrested for coming here. he couldn't afford the ransom, so by law, he'll be put to death before the sun sets. here's the money you asked me to hold.", "dromio, bring this money to the centaur inn, where we're lodging, and wait there until i come. it'll be lunchtime within an hour. until then, i'll walk around town, peruse the markets, and gaze upon the buildings, and then i'll return and sleep at the inn. i'm stiff and weary from all this travel. get going now.", "many men would take you literally and take off with all this money.", "he's a trustworthy servant. often, when i'm dulled by worry and melancholy, he lightens my mood with his merry pranks. listen, will you walk with me around the town and then dine with me at the inn?", "begging your pardon, but i've been invited to see some merchants, who i'm hoping to see a profit from. but if"], ["it pleases you, i'll meet you in the marketplace at five and will keep you company until bedtime. right now, my pressing business calls me away.", "farewell till then. i will go lose myself, wandering up and down throughout the city.", "sir, i leave you to your own contentment.", "he leaves me to my own contentment, but that's the one thing i cannot find. out in the world, i'm like a drop of water, trying to find a drop that matches in the whole wide ocean. when that drop fails its taskunnoticed, inquisitiveit dissipates into the ocean and destroys itself. in order to find a mother and a brother, i too have lost myself, unhappily.", "here comes the man who shares my birthday. what is it? how is it that you've come back so soon?", "back so soon? too late is more like it. the chicken is burning, the pig is overcooked, the clock has already struck twelve, and my mistress has clocked me one on the cheek. she's hot because lunch is cold; lunch is cold because you're not home; you're not home because you're not hungry; you're not hungry because you've eaten already. but we servants who know how to properly fast and pray are being punished for your offenses today."], ["hold on a second. answer me this, please: where's the money i gave you?", "oh, the sixpence you gave me last wednesday to buy leather goods for my mistress? the saddle maker has it, sir i didn't keep it.", "i'm not in a joking mood. tell me right now and stop fooling: where's the money? we're strangers here. how dare you let such a large amount escape your keeping?", "please, sir; crack jokes over lunch. my mistress made me hurry here. if i go back without you, she'll punish your faults by breaking my head open. i should think that your appetite would act like a clock (as mine does) and bring you home on its own, without the need for a messenger.", "that's enough, dromio, please. this isn't a good moment for jokes save them till a happier time. where's the gold i gave you?", "gave me, sir? you didn't give me any gold.", "come on, you rogue. quit joking. tell me what you've done with the money i entrusted to you.", "the only thing that i've been entrusted with was getting you from the market and bringing you to your house, the phoenix, for lunch. my mistress and her sister are waiting for you.", "tell me where you've stowed away my money, or i swear i'll break that comical head of yours for goofing when i'm not in the mood. where are the thousand you had from me?"], ["i have some marks from you on my head and some of my mistress's marks on my body. but between the both of you, i don't have a thousand marks. if i gave those marks back to you, chances are you wouldn't take them as patiently as i did.", "your mistress's marks? what mistress do you have?", "your wife, sir. my mistress. at the phoenix. the one who's waiting for you to come home for lunch and praying that you'll get home quickly.", "what, are you going to mock me to my face when i told you not to? there, take that, you scoundrel! ( dromio of ephesus", "what are you doing? stop, for god's sake! well, if you don't, then i'm out of here.", "i swear, somehow the fool has been cheated out of all my money. they say that this town is full of deception illusionists that can fool the eye, dark sorcerers who can bewitch your mind, soul-killing witches who can disfigure your body, disguised swindlers, fast-talking fakers, and all kinds of other unchecked sins. if this is true, then i'll be leaving all the sooner. i'll go to the centaur to find this servant of mine i fear that my money isn't safe."], ["neither my husband nor the slave has returned, even though i sent the slave off running. surely, luciana, it's already two o'clock.", "maybe some merchant at the marketplace invited him home for lunch. sister, let's eat and stop worrying. a man is master of his own freedom: time is his only master, and when the right moment comes along, he'll come or go as he pleases. if this is so, be patient, sister.", "why should men be more free than women?", "because their business lies outside the home.", "listen, when i behave this way toward him, he hates it.", "oh, you should know that he's the to your will.", "only a mule would agree to that.", "why, too much freedom leads to woe. there's nothing under heaven that doesn't have its limits. the beasts on the earth, the fish in the sea, and the birds in the sky are all subject to the males of their species and under their control. men, who are nearest to god, are the masters of all these creatures. and men the lords of the wide"], ["world and the wild watery seas, gifted with intellectual sense and souls, greater than the fish and the birds are the masters of women and their lords. therefore, you should obey their wishes.", "it's this servantlike mentality that's keeping you unmarried.", "no, that's not it it's because of what happens in the marriage bed.", "but if you were married, you'd wield some influence.", "before i learn how to love, i'll learn how to follow orders.", "what if your husband strays elsewhere?", "i'd endure it until he came home again.", "now that's patience! no wonder she's waiting to get married. it's easy to preach meekness when you have no reason to act otherwise. when we're faced with a wretched person, bruised and crying with hardship, we try to get them to shush up. and yet, if we were suffering the same kind of pain, we'd complain just as much if not more! so you, who have no husband causing you problems, want to comfort me by preaching the virtue of feeble patience. but if you live to see yourself similarly denied your rights, this foolish patience will abandon you.", "well, i'll get married one day, just to see. here comes your servant your husband must be coming soon."], ["tell me, is your tardy master close at hand?", "no; but he came at me with two hands just ask my .", "did you talk to him? do you know his plans?", "yes, yes, he told me his plans on my ears. damn his hands i could barely it.", "did he speak so ambiguously that you couldn't get a feeling for what he meant?", "no; he hit me very clearly and i felt his punches perfectly well. they were so dreadful, i could barely stand up under them.", "but please, tell me: is he coming home? it seems he has taken great care to please his wife.", "why, mistress, my master is as angry as a bull with horns.", "horns? you bastard!", "i don't mean he's mad. but he sure is angry. when i asked him to come home to lunch, he asked me for a thousand marks. \"it's lunchtime,\" i said. \"my gold,\" he said. \"the meat's burning,\" i said. \"my gold,\" he said. \"will you come home?\" i said."], ["\"my gold,\" he said. \"where's the thousand marks i gave you, scoundrel?\" \"the pig,\" i said, \"is burned.\" \"my gold,\" he said. \"my mistress,\" i said. \"damn your mistress! i don't know your mistress, the hell with your mistress!\"", "who said that?", "my master said it. \"i don't know,\" he said, \"any house, wife, or mistress.\" my message, which was supposed to be delivered with my mouth, ended up being carried back home by my shoulders. because at the end of it all, that's where he beat me.", "go back again, slave, and bring him home.", "go back again, to be beaten home again? for god's sake, send somebody else.", "go back, slave, or i'll knock you one across the head.", "and he'll add another knock across. with all these crosses, i'll have a holy head.", "get out of here, you blathering peasant! bring your master home.", "do i treat you this roundly? you're kicking me around like i'm a football. you kick me out, he kicks me back. if i keep working for you, i'm going to end up wrapped in leather, like a football.", "look at you! you have impatience all over your face."], ["he feels the need to grace all his other tramps with his presence while i sit at home starving for a smile from him. has homely old age taken the alluring beauty from my poor cheeks? that's because he has squandered my beauty. am i boring? have i lost my wit? if my conversation is no longer free and clever, that's because he's dulled it i'm like a sharp tool he's blunted with a hard piece of marble. is he charmed by their pretty clothes? well, that's not my fault he's the one in charge of my spending. what faults can you find in me that weren't first caused by him? one smile from him would repair my decayed beauty. but like an unruly deer, he's always trespassing past the park borders and straying away from home to feed in new pastures. i am nothing but a poor, used fool.", "this jealousy is harming only you! drive it out of you.", "only someone who doesn't feel this pain could tell me to ignore it. i know his eyes are worshiping some other woman, or why wouldn't he be here? sister, you know he promised to give me a necklace. i would gladly do without that if he would only stay faithful to me. even the best jewel can be tarnished. gold, however, can't be corrupted though it can be worn down if it's touched too often. and no man with a reputation will tarnish that name with lies and bad behavior. since my beauty no longer pleases my husband, i'll weep away what's left and then die with weeping.", "how many infatuated people go mad with jealousy!"], ["the gold i gave dromio is safe and sound at the centaur, and the inn host says that dromio has left and is looking for me. i haven't spoken to him since i sent him away from the marketplace earlier. here he comes.", "so, sir. are you over your ridiculous mood? if you like being hit, crack some more jokes. you never heard of the centaur? you weren't given any gold? your mistress sent for me to come to dinner? the phoenix is my house? were you mad when you spoke to me so madly?", "said what, sir? when did i say all that?", "just now. right here. less than half an hour ago.", "i haven't seen you since you sent me to the centaur with the gold you gave me.", "you moron, you denied having any gold, and you told me about a mistress and a lunch. and i hope you realized i wasn't very happy about it.", "i'm glad to see you in such a merry mood. but what's the joke? please, master, tell me."], ["what, are you mocking me to my face? you think i'm joking? here. take that, and that! dromio of syracuse", "stop, sir, for god's sake! now this joke has turned serious. why are you doing this?", "just because i act familiar with you sometimes and let you fool around and joke with me, you try to take advantage of my affection. you pull pranks when i'm in a serious mood. you know, foolish gnats come out in the sunshine, but they creep back into their holes when it's dark. if you want to crack jokes, first check what kind of mood i'm in and then adjust your behavior to suit me. if you don't learn this rule, i'll have to beat it into your sconce.", "you call it my \" \"? i'd rather call it my \"head\" so you'd stop battering it. if you keep pounding me, i'll need a sconce to wrap my head with, or else i'll have to keep my brain in my chest. but sir, why are you beating me?", "don't you know?", "all i know is that i'm being beaten.", "should i tell you why?", "yes, and wherefore. you know the old saying: \"every why' has a wherefore.'\""], ["\"why\" first: for defying me. and then \"wherefore\": for doing it a second time.", "i don't think any man's ever been beaten for a \"why\" and \"wherefore\" that made so little sense. well, thank you.", "thank me? for what?", "because you gave me something for nothing.", "next time i'll give you nothing for something. is it lunchtime?", "no. the meat lacks something that i have.", "what would that be?", "a basting.", "well, then it will be dry.", "if it is, i suggest you don't eat it.", "why not?", "because it will make you angry, and that will get me another beating.", "well, learn to make jokes at the appropriate time. there's a time for all things.", "before you got so angry, i never would have thought that."], ["why not?", "i'll tell you: it's because of a law as plain as father time's bald head.", "let's hear it.", "there may be a time for everything, but no man who has gone bald naturally can get his hair back.", "can't he get it by ?", "yes, he can pay a fine for a wig and then recover another man's lost hair.", "why is time so cheap about giving out hair? after all, it's plentiful in its growth.", "because animals are blessed with hair. with men, he's been stingy with hair, but he makes up for it by giving them intelligence.", "but a lot of men have more hair than intelligence.", "and not one of them is smart enough to stop himself from going bald.", "so then, you must think that hairy men are honest and simpleminded."], ["the more simpleminded they are, the sooner they . but they have a good time doing so.", "why?", "two reasons. and good ones, too.", "not good ones, please.", "then sure ones.", "no, not sure ones when we're talking about something unsure.", "then certain ones.", "name them.", "one, so they can save the money they spent on hairstyling, and two, so that when their hair falls out it doesn't land in their dinner.", "you were supposed to be proving that there isn't time for everything.", "right, and i did, sir. there's no time to get back hair that's fallen out."], ["you didn't come up with a very good proof.", "then i'll change it to this: father time himself is bald, so for all time there will be bald men.", "i knew you'd come up with a conclusion. but wait who's that waving to us?", "yes, yes, antipholus: look bewildered and frown at me. you've given away all your sweet looks to some other woman i am not adriana nor your wife. there was a time when you'd freely tell me that words were never music to your ear unless i said them, that objects never pleased your eye unless i showed them to you, that touches never pleased your hands unless they were my touches, and that food never tasted sweet to you unless i had prepared it. how is it, my husband oh, how is it that you have become a stranger to yourself? i say yourself because you are a stranger to me now, but when we are indivisible and united in one body, i am better than the best part of you. ah, don't tear yourself away from me! for you should know, my love, that it would be as easy to let a drop of water fall into the churning sea and then fish it out again, unmingled and undiminished, as it would be to take yourself from me without taking me out of myself as well. how deeply would it cut you if you heard that i had been cheating on you and that my body which is sworn for you only had been contaminated by vile lust?"], ["wouldn't you spit at me, and spurn me, and throw our marriage vows in my face? wouldn't you tear the mark off my , cut the wedding ring off my finger, and swear to divorce me? i know you would, so go ahead. for i have, in fact, committed adultery, and my blood has been contaminated by lust. because if marriage has made us one, then when you cheat, you poison my flesh as well your contagion makes me a prostitute. so stay faithful to me and return to your marriage bed.that way, my reputation will be protected and your honor will be intact.", "are you talking to me, fair woman? i don't know you. i've only been in ephesus for two hours. your talk is as strange to me as your town. i'm trying with all my wits to figure out what you mean, but i can't understand a word of it.", "shame on you, brother-in-law! you've changed so much! why are you treating my sister like this? she sent dromio to bring you home for lunch.", "dromio?", "me?", "you. and this is what you told me he said: that he beat you and pretended his house wasn't his and i wasn't his wife.", "did you talk with this woman? what kind of scheme do you have going together?"], ["me, sir? i never saw her till now.", "you liar! you said those exact things to me back in the marketplace.", "i never talked with her in my life.", "then how does she know our names? by magic?", "how distasteful! that a man of your stature would scheme with his servant to upset me like this. it may be my fault that you've been avoiding me, but don't make things worse by treating me with contempt as well. i'll hang on your sleeve: you're an elm tree, my husband, and i'm a vine. my weakness is enhanced by your strength, which gives me the strength to say this: the things that take you away from me are worthless just overgrown weeds in need of a trimming. they get into your system and infect you, feeding off your confusion.", "she's talking to me. she's talking about me. what, was i married to her in a dream? or am i asleep now and imagining all this? what is making our eyes and ears act so strangely? until i know for sure, i'll humor her.", "dromio, tell the servants to prepare for lunch.", "oh, i wish i had my rosary! i'll cross myself. this must be some kind of fairyland. oh, spite of spites! we're"], ["speaking with goblins, owls, and demons. if we don't obey them, they'll suck the life out of us or pinch us black and blue.", "why are you mumbling to yourself instead of answering the order i gave you? dromio, you drone, you snail, you slug, you idiot!", "i've been transformed somehow, haven't i, master?", "i think your mind has been altered, and mine too.", "no, master, i've been changed in both mind and body.", "your body looks the same.", "no, i'm an .", "if you've changed into anything, it's an ass.", "that's true. she's riding me hard, and all i want to do is get out of here. i must be as stupid as an ass that's why i don't know her, but she knows me.", "all right, all right. i won't play the fool anymore and just cry while my husband and his man laugh at me. come, husband, let's go to lunch. dromio, guard the door. husband, i'll eat with you in private today and hear your confession about all the pranks you've pulled. , if anyone asks where your master is, say he's out to lunch, and don't let anyone come in. come, sister. dromio, do a good job as doorkeeper.", "am i on earth, in heaven, or in hell? asleep or awake? crazy or sane? these people know me, but i don't"], ["know myself! i'll agree with them and keep with it, whatever happens.", "master, should i watch the door?", "yes, and don't let anyone come in, or else i'll break your head.", "come come, antipholus. we're late for lunch."], ["signior angelo, please excuse us. my wife gets angry when i'm late. here's the story we'll tell her: that i was with you at your shop, watching you make her necklace, and that you're going to deliver it tomorrow. but here comes a scoundrel who says he saw me at the marketplace and that i beat on him, told him i'd given him a thousand marks in gold, and then lied about my wife and my house. you drunkard, what was that all about?", "say what you want, but i know what i know. you beat me at the marketplace, and i have the bruises to prove it. if my skin were paper and your punches were ink, you could read the beating on my body.", "i think you're an ass.", "honestly, it sure looks that way, judging by all the beatings and the bad treatment i'm getting. since i'm an ass, i ought to kick like one. then you'd be scared of me and keep away.", "signior balthasar, you look upset. i hope the good meal i'm going to give you will show the goodwill i bear you and how welcome you are."], ["your delicacies aren't worth as much to me as your welcome is.", "signior balthasar, all the welcome in the world can't compare to a good meal, whatever kind of food it might be.", "good food's not a big deal everyone can afford that.", "and everyone can say \"welcome,\" which is just a word.", "a little food and a huge welcome makes a joyous feast.", "sure, to a cheap host and an even cheaper guest. but look, even if my dishes are poor, eat them with my best wishes. you may come across better food, but not a warmer welcome. what's this? my door is locked. dromio tell them to let us in.", "maud, bridget, marian, ciceley, gillian, ginn!", "dope, moron, eunuch, fool, idiot, clown! either get away from the door or sit yourself down there! what, are you trying to summon women with your spells is that why you're calling out so many names? isn't one enough for you? get away with you!", "what clown did they hire as the new doorkeeper? my master is standing out in the street!", "then he should go back where he came from so he doesn't catch a cold.", "who's in there? hey, open the door!"], ["right. give me one good reason and i will.", "a reason? so i can eat lunch. i haven't eaten today.", "and you won't eat here today. come again some other time.", "who do you think you are, keeping me out of my own house?", "i'm the doorkeeper for the moment, and my name is dromio.", "you jerk! you've stolen both my job and my name! true, the job never did me much good, and my name only ever got me in trouble. if you were the dromio in my shoes today, you would have felt like you traded your head for a target and your name for the name of \"ass.\"", "what's all the commotion, dromio? who's at the door?", "luce, let my master in.", "no way, he's too late. tell your master that.", "oh, lord, this makes me laugh! i'll come at you with the old proverb: \"should i make myself at home?\"", "i'll come at you with another: \"i'd like to see you try it!\""], ["if your name's luce, then i say: luce, good answer!", "listen up, you slave. are you going to let us in?", "i was going to ask you that question.", "but you already answered no.", "come, help me bang on the door, master. well done! we answered them, blow for blow.", "you good-for-nothing, let me in.", "says who?", "master, knock hard upon the door.", "he can knock till it hurts.", "if i break the door down, slave, you'll be sorry for this.", "why are we putting up with all this? the town's got a pair of .", "who's making such a ruckus at the door?", "i swear, this town's plagued by troublesome boys.", "is that you, wife? you could have come sooner."], ["your wife, you scoundrel? get away from the door.", "if she punishes you, master, she's sure to punish me.", "it looks like we're not going to get food or welcome here.", "we argued about which was best, and now we won't get either one.", "master, your guests are just standing here. tell them they're welcome.", "there's something strange in the air that's keeping us from getting in.", "and if your clothes were as thin as mine, you'd really feel the air. the food inside is warm, but you're out here freezing. it would make any man as mad as a bull to be betrayed like this.", "go get me something i can use to break down the door.", "break anything here and i'll break your head.", "i'll break words with you, sir. and since words are just wind, i'll be breaking wind right in your face.", "it seems you're the one who needs to be broken. be off with you, you dog!"], ["i've had enough of this \"off with you!\" come on, let me in!", "of course when birds have no feathers and fish have no fins.", "well, i'm going to break in. go get me a crow.", "a crow without feathers? master, do you really mean that? he said \"when fish have no fins,\" and you came back with a bird with no feathers. dromio of syracuse if a crow gets us in, sirrah, then you and i will have a .", "i meant a crowbar. get going already.", "be patient, sir! don't do this! this will hurt your reputation and make your wife, who's innocent, look suspicious. look, you've known her a long time. she's wise, serious, mature, and modest. all this suggests that she has a good reason for doing this to you. let's assume that she has a reason, which you don't know yet: have faith that she'll eventually explain why she shut the doors on you today. listen to me. be patient and leave, and we'll all go to the tiger for lunch. in the evening, come back alone and figure out this strange resistance. if you get violent and break in now, in broad daylight, people will talk about it. the common mob will presume things, and your untarnished reputation will be damaged and that damage will last long after you're dead. slander passes from generation to generation, and once it sticks to a family, it's there forever."], ["you're right i'll go quietly. and even though i'm in a distasteful mood, i'll work on being happy. i know a terrific wench. she's beautiful and charming a little wild, but also gentle. we'll eat at her place. my wife has accused me more than once of misbehaving with this woman. i swear to her that i haven't, but it doesn't change anything. we'll go to her place for lunch. angelo go get the necklace, which i'm sure is done by now. bring it to the porcupine, where this woman is. i'll to give it to her, just to spite my wife. hurry, good sir. since my own doors refuse to admit me, i'll knock somewhere else and see if they turn me away as well.", "i'll meet you there in an hour.", "do that. this little prank of hers is going to cost me."], ["have you completely forgotten your duty as a husband? antipholus, your marriage is still fresh and new, like the springtime have the young shoots of your love already started to wither? is the building of your love already in ruins? if you married my sister for her wealth, then for her wealth's sake, treat her with more kindness. or if your affection has already strayed to another woman, at least be stealthy about it. hide your false love, blindfold yourself so my sister cannot read your faithlessness in your eyes. watch what you say, and don't let your own words give away your shame. look sweet and act kindly be attractive in your disloyalty. disguise your misbehavior as integrity, and behave properly even if your heart is tainted. though you are sinful, carry yourself like a holy saint. be false in secret: why does she need to know? what foolish thief brags about his crimes? it's doubly wrong to cheat on your wife and then let her see the offense in your eyes. when you do something shameful, it's possible to put a good spin on it, but bad deeds are made worse by speaking of them. alas, poor women! we're so gullible, we believe it when you say you love us. even if you love someone else in your heart, make it appear as if you love us. we follow in your orbit, and you have the power to move us. so, my sweet brother-in-law, go inside. comfort my sister, cheer her up, call her \"wife.\" it's a holy thing to lie a little when sweet flattery can smooth over trouble.", "sweet mistress i don't know what other name to give you, or how you've figured out mine you seem as"], ["wise and graceful as the earth is wonderful and divine. teach me how i should think and speak. my understanding is clumsy and human, riddled with errors it is feeble, shallow, and weak. reveal to me the hidden meaning of your words. why would you have me betray the truth of my emotions and make my love wander in some other direction? are you a god? are you trying to remake me? go ahead, i'll yield to your power. but if i am myself, then i know for sure that your weeping sister is not my wife. i don't owe her any duty it's you that i submit to. oh, sweet mermaid, don't command me to drown myself in the flood of your sister's tears. , use your song to make me love you instead, and i will obey. spread your golden hair over the silver waves, and i will lie down in it like a bed. if a man could in that glorious fantasy, then i think he would benefit by dying. love is light and therefore floats if my love is false, let me sink!", "are you insane, talking like this?", "not insane, but amazed. i don't know how.", "your eyes are playing tricks on you.", "that's because you are near me, and you're as dazzling as the sun."], ["train your eye on what you should be looking at, and you'll see straight again.", "sweet love, i'd rather close my eyes than look at darkness.", "why are you calling me \"love\"? call my sister that.", "your sister's sister.", "that's my sister.", "no, it's you: my better half. my eye's clear vision, my heart's most precious desire. my food, my fortune, my sweetest hope, my heaven on earth, and my entrance to heaven.", "my sister is all those things, or else she should be.", "call yourself your own sister, because i want you. i will love you, and with you i'll spend my life. you have no husband yet, and i have no wife. give me your hand.", "oh, wait, sir. stay here. i'll go get my sister and see what she thinks.", "what's going on, dromio? where are you running so fast?", "do you know me? am i dromio? am i your servant? am i myself?"], ["you are dromio, you are my servant, and you are yourself.", "i'm an ass, i'm a woman's servant, and i'm beside myself.", "what woman's servant? what do you mean, beside yourself?", "i'll tell you. besides belonging to myself, i belong to a woman. a woman who says she owns me, who won't leave me alone, and who wants me.", "how does she claim to own you?", "the same way a person would claim to own his horse. and she wants me as a beast. i don't mean that she wants me because a beast, but that she, who is a beast, says i belong to her.", "what's she like?", "she has a very significant body. you couldn't even talk about it without saying, my luck would be running thin if i ended up with her, although she'd make it a fat marriage.", "what do you mean, a fat marriage?", "sir, she works in the kitchen, so she's oily. the only thing i could do with her is to use all that oil as fuel in a lamp and then use that light to run away by. her"], ["clothes are so oily, they'd burn through the longest winter. even if she lives till the end of the world, she'd keep burning an additional week.", "what's her skin like?", "it's dark, like my shoe. but it's not as clean. you'd be up to your ankles in how filthy it is.", "some water will fix that.", "no, it's permanent. noah's flood wouldn't be enough water to clean it.", "what's her name?", "nell. but an and three-quarters wouldn't be long enough to measure her waist.", "so she's wide?", "her hips are as wide as she is tall. she's round, like a globe. i could use her like a map to find out where countries are.", "what part of her body is ireland?", "her bottom. it's near the .", "where's scotland?"], ["in the palm of her hand, which is covered in .", "where's france?", "in her , which is enormous because of her receding hairline.", "where's england?", "i thought her teeth might be like the , but they're dark and stained. so i guess it's her chin, which is separated from her forehead by all the sweat on her face.", "where's spain?", "honestly, i didn't see it, but i felt it in her hot breath.", "where's america and the west indies?"], ["oh, sir, on her nose, which is covered with pimples, sores, and red welts. it points straight down at her mouth, which catches everything that drips from it.", "where's belgium and the ?", "oh, sir, i didn't look down there. in conclusion, this witch said i was hers. she called me dromio and swore i'd promised to marry her. she knew private things about my body, like the birthmark on my shoulder, the mole on my neck, and the huge wart on my left arm. i was terrified, and i ran away from her as if she were a witch. and i think that if i hadn't been brave and strong, she would have turned me into a dog and made me her slave.", "get going hustle over to the port. if there's enough wind for a ship to sail out tonight, i won't spend tonight in this town. if a ship's leaving, come to the marketplace. i'll wait there for you. if everyone here knows us but we don't know anybody, it's time, i think, for us to pack our bags and take off.", "i'll run from this woman who claims to be my wife as fast as i'd run from a bear.", "everyone who lives here is a witch. that means it's high time for me to go. that woman who claims i am her husband i loathe her in my soul. but her gorgeous sister, who's so lovely and gracious, who's so charming and who speaks so well,"], ["almost makes me want to stay here against my better judgment. i'd better stop up my ears against this siren's song.", "master antipholus", "yes, that's my name.", "i know that, sir. look, here's the necklace. i was on my way to take it to you at the porcupine, but it took a little longer to finish than i thought it would.", "what do you want me to do with this?", "whatever you want i made it for you.", "made it for me? i didn't order it.", "you did not just once or twice, but twenty times. take it home and make your wife happy. i'll come over at suppertime and you can pay me for it then.", "you should take the money now. if you don't, you might never see the money or the necklace ever again.", "you're a funny man, sir. take care.", "i don't know what to think about this. but what i do think is that nobody in his right mind would refuse to accept such a beautiful necklace when somebody offers it. i"], ["guess there's no need to be a thief in ephesus. people come up to you in the street and hand you gold. i'll go wait for dromio at the marketplace. if any ships are sailing, i'll get right on one."], ["you've owed me this money since the pentecost holiday. i haven't pressed you for it, and i wouldn't now except that i'm going to persia and i need money for the trip. so pay me now, or i'll have this officer arrest you.", "antipholus owes me the exact amount that i owe you. just before i ran into you, i gave him a necklace. at five o'clock he's going to pay me for it. please, come to his house with me. i'll pay what i owe you then and say thank you as well.", "he saves you the trouble: look, here he comes.", "dromio i'm going to the jeweler's house. you go buy a piece of rope i'll whip my wife and her cohorts for locking me out of my own house. wait a minute! i see the jeweler. go, be gone with you. buy a rope and bring it to me."], ["i buy myself a thousand beatings a year if i buy a rope.", "angelo good luck to any man who trusts you. i swore that you would come with the necklace, but neither you nor the necklace showed up. perhaps you were concerned about being chained to me and so decided not to come.", "all joking aside, here's an invoice spelling out exactly how many carats the necklace weighs as well as the quality of the gold and the workmanship. the total due is about three ducats more than i owe this gentleman. please, pay him immediately. he's about to leave on a trip and he's waiting for the money.", "i don't have the cash right now. besides, i have some business to take care of in town. good signior, take this stranger to my house. bring the necklace with you, and tell my wife to pay you the amount due. i might make it back in time to meet you.", "so you'll bring the necklace to her yourself?", "no. you bring it in case i can't make it.", "all right, sir, i will. do you have it with you?", "if i don't, i hope you do. or else you'll leave without your money."], ["listen, please, give me the necklace. this gentleman's ready to go. the wind is right and it's high tide, and i've delayed him a long time already.", "good lord! you're using this as an excuse for not showing up at the porcupine like you promised. i should have reprimanded you then for not bringing it, but you started fighting with me first.", "it's getting late. please, sir, hurry up.", "antipholus, you hear how the man pleads with me. give me the necklace!", "give it to my wife, and get your money.", "come, come. you know i gave it to you just now. send the necklace to her, or send me with a token that will authorize her to pay me.", "damn it, this isn't funny. where's the necklace? let me see it.", "my business cannot wait for this delay. antipholus good sir, tell me if you're going to pay me. if not, i'll turn this man over to the officer.", "pay you? what should i pay you?", "the money you owe me for the necklace.", "i owe you nothing until i receive the necklace.", "you know that i gave it to you a half hour ago."], ["you gave me nothing, and you wrong me by saying you did.", "you wrong me even more, sir, by denying it. consider how poorly this reflects on me.", "well, officer, i charge you to arrest him.", "i will. ( angelo) and i order you to obey me, in the name of the duke.", "this harms my reputation. either pay this sum, antipholus, or i'll have this officer arrest you.", "pay for something i never got? go ahead, you fool. arrest me if you dare.", "officer, here's your fee arrest him. i would have my own brother arrested if he treated me so terribly.", "you're under arrest, sir. you hear the charges.", "i'll obey you until i can make bail. but angelo, you'll pay for this, even if it costs all the precious metals in your jewelry shop.", "sir, the laws of ephesus will be on my side, and you'll be embarrassed. i'm certain of it."], ["master, there's a ship from epidamnum that's going to set sail as soon as its owner gets on board. i've left our luggage on the ship, and i bought the oil, balm, and liquor you wanted. the ship is ready, the wind is up, and the sailors are only waiting for their owner and for you.", "what are you, a madman? you annoying idiot, what epidamnum ship is waiting for me?", "a ship you sent me to find, to book passage out of here.", "you drunken slave, i sent you for a rope, and i told you what to do with it.", "yeah, right you sent me to get whipped. you sent me to the port to find a ship.", "i'll debate this with you later, and then i'll teach you to listen more carefully. go to adriana, you scoundrel, and quickly. give her this key, and tell her that there's money in the desk that's covered with a turkish tapestry. have her send it to me. tell her that i've been arrested and the money will be my bail. hurry, you slave! go! officer, take me to prison until the money comes."], ["to adriana? that's where we had lunch. where that \"sweetheart\" said i was her husband! she's too much for me to handle. but i must go there, against my will: servants must fulfill their masters' wishes."], ["oh, luciana, did he tempt you like that? could you tell from his face if he was serious? yes or no? did he look flushed or pale? sad or happy? could you tell from his looks what he was feeling in his heart?", "first, he said you had no right to him.", "he meant he did nothing right for me which is true, unfortunately.", "then he swore he was a stranger here.", "and that's true he being strange. and yet he lies as well, for he's no stranger.", "then i pleaded for you.", "and what did he say?", "that he felt for me the love that i begged him to feel for you.", "how did he try to persuade you to love him?", "with words that if they were spoken honestly might have moved me. first, he praised my beauty, then my eloquence.", "did you praise him as well?"], ["have some patience, please.", "i cannot and i will not keep quiet. my voice will have its way, even if my heart can't. he is misshapen, crooked, old, and withered. his face is ugly, and his body is even worse all shapeless, everywhere. he is vicious, mean, foolish, blunt, unkind. his body is deformed, and his mind is worse.", "then why be jealous of a person like that? when an evil thing has been lost, no one cries.", "oh, but i think of him more highly than i say i do and i wish he looked worse in other women's eyes. i'm like a lapwing, creating a diversion in order to distract predators from my nest. my heart adores him, even though my tongue curses him.", "here! go! the desk! money! come on, now! hurry!", "how did you lose your breath?", "by running fast.", "where's your master, dromio? is he all right?", "no, he's in a place worse than hell. a devil in a tough uniform has him a man whose heart is as hard as steel. a fiend and a goblin, pitiless and rough. a wolf no, even worse a man all in tough leather. a backbiting friend, one who grabs people, who patrols the streets and passageways. a hunting dog that runs in"], ["the opposite direction of its prey, yet can follow the scent of the hunt. a man who puts people away before the verdict is announced.", "speak, man, what's the matter?", "i don't know what the matter is, but he's been arrested for it.", "what? he's been arrested? tell me, who had him arrested?", "i don't know who had him arrested, but the man that arrested him was in a suit of leather. mistress, will you send him bail? the money in the desk?", "get it, sister.", "i don't understand it. how could he be in debt without me knowing it? tell me, was he arrested because of a ?", "not for a band, but for something stronger: a necklace, a necklace! don't you hear it ring?", "what, the necklace?", "no, no, the bell. it's time for me to go. it was two o'clock when i left him, and now it's one.", "time's running backward? i've never heard of that.", "oh, sure. when an meets a cop, it turns and runs in fear."], ["time's not the one in debt. your logic is so foolish.", "time is always bankrupt: it owes more than it can ever pay back in a season. and time's a thief, too don't you know the old saying, \"time steals along\"? so if time is in debt and also a thief, and a cop comes, don't you think time would turn back an hour?", "here's the money, dromio. take it to your master and bring him home immediately. come, sister, my imagination is too much for me: it both comforts me and depresses me."], ["every person i meet greets me like an old friend, and every one of them knows my name. some of them give me money, some invite me places, some thank me for the kind things i've done for them, some try to sell me things. just now a tailor showed me fabrics he bought especially for me and then started to take my measurements. these are tricks of the imagination, and this place is filled with magicians.", "here's the money you wanted, master. hey, have you gotten rid of that ?", "what gold is this? who's this adam you speak of?", "not the adam from the garden of eden, but the adam from the jailhouse. the one that wears leather clothes. the one that grabbed you and arrested you.", "i don't know what you're talking about."], ["no? it's plain enough. the adam who looks like a cello, in a big leather case. the one who gives tired people \"arrest.\" the one who gives ruined men new suits law suits. the one who's determined to do more damage with his nightstick than a soldier does with his pike.", "you mean an officer?", "yes, the leader of the team; the one that gets you if you can't pay a debt; the one who assumes people are always going to bed and says to them, \"have arrest.\"", "well, sir, stop your joking there. are any ships leaving tonight? can we go?", "why, sir, i told you an hour ago that the good ship was leaving tonight, but then the officer got you, and you decided to wait for the little rowboat . here's the bail money you sent me to get.", "this fellow's gone mad, and so have i. we're in some kind of dream world. please, somebody, get us out of here!", "good to see you, master antipholus. i see you've met with the jeweler. is that chain you're wearing the one you promised to give to me?", "get away from me, satan! don't try to tempt me!", "master, is this satan's mistress?"], ["she's the devil.", "no, she's worse: she's the devil's mother, and she comes to us disguised as an easy wench. and that's why some women say, \"god damn me,\" which is the same thing as saying, \"god make me an easy wench.\" the bible says the devil looks like an angel of light. but fire also gives off light, and fire will burn you. in other words, easy wenches will burn you. keep away from this one.", "you and your servant are very funny, sir. will you come with me? can we finish our lunch?", "master, if you eat with her, bring really long silverware.", "why, dromio?", "because of the old saying: \"he who eats with the devil needs a very long spoon.\" you need to keep far away from them.", "( courtesan) get away, you demon! you talk about eating? you're a sorceress, like everyone else here. i'll conjure you, like a spell: get away from me.", "give me back the ring i gave you at lunch, or give me the necklace you promised in exchange. then i'll be gone, sir, and stop troubling you."], ["some ask for nothing more than nail clippings, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a nut, or a cherry pit. but this one's greedy: she wants a necklace. be wise, master. if you give it to her, she'll shake the chain and frighten us, like the angel in the bible.", "now listen, either give me my ring or give me the necklace. i hope you're not trying to cheat me.", "be gone, witch! come, dromio, let's go.", "accusing us of cheating is like the proud peacock accusing someone else of pride. mistress, you know about that.", "antipholus has gone insane, no question about it. if not, he'd never behave like this. he has a ring of mine, worth forty ducats, and he promised to give me a necklace in exchange for it. now he won't give me either. the reason i think he's insane, besides the way he just acted, is that he told a senseless story over lunch about being locked out of his own house. his wife probably did it on purpose because she knows what kind of fits he's having. i must go to his house and tell his wife that he came bursting into my place like a lunatic and stole my ring. it's my best option: i can't afford to lose forty ducats."], ["don't worry, man, i won't try to escape. when it's time for me to be freed, i'll pay you the fee you're entitled to for arresting me. my wife's in a perverse mood today. she'll be suspicious when the messenger tells her that i was arrested. i tell you, this will make her angry when she hears about it.", "here's my servant. i think he's got the money. hello there, sir! do you have what i told you to get?", "yes. and this rope will take care of everybody, i guarantee it.", "but where's the money?", "why, sir, i spent it on this rope.", "you idiot! five hundred ducats for a rope?", "i can get you five hundred ropes for that price.", "why did i just send you home?", "to get a piece of rope. and here i am, with that piece.", "and i'll use that piece of rope to welcome you with. dromio of ephesus"], ["good sir, calm down.", "you should tell me to calm down i'm the one who's suffering here.", "hold your tongue.", "no, you should tell him to hold his hands!", "you son of a bitch, senseless villain!", "i wish i were senseless, sir, so that i wouldn't feel your punches!", "the only thing you can sense are punches just like an ass.", "i am an ass, indeed: you can tell by my long ears. i've served this man from the moment i was born until this very instant, and all i've ever gotten from him are bruises. when i'm cold, his beatings keep me warm. when i'm hot, they keep me cool. he wakes me up by beating me, makes me stand by beating me, sends me out of the house and welcomes me back by beating me. seriously, i carry beatings around with me like a beggar woman carries her baby. i figure that once he's crippled me, i'll beg by showing off my beatings.", "that's enough. my wife's coming."], ["mistress, think about your end beware of your death! or as the parrot says: \"beware of the end,\" and watch out for a hanging.", "are you going to keep talking? dromio of ephesus", "now what do you think? your husband's mad, isn't he?", "this terrible behavior proves it. doctor pinch, you're an exorcist. if you can bring him back to his senses, i'll pay you whatever you demand.", "alas, how passionate and angry he looks!", "look! he's trembling in his fit!", "give me your hand. let me take your pulse.", "here's my hand. let it feel your ear. pinch", "satan! you are living inside this man! i order you to release him through my prayers and to return immediately to the darkness you came from. i demand this in the name of all the saints in heaven.", "shut up, you doddering old wizard! i'm not possessed!", "oh, i wish you weren't, you poor, frightened soul.", "listen, hussy is this man one of your customers? did this fool with the yellow face feast and celebrate in my house today while the guilty doors shut in my face and locked me out of my own house?"], ["oh, husband, god himself knows you ate at home. i wish you had stayed there, avoiding these scandals and this public embarrassment!", "ate at home? you there, rogue, what do you have to say about that?", "i swear, sir, you did not eat at home.", "my doors were locked and i was shut out, right?", "by god, your doors were locked and you were shut out.", "and she screamed at me, right?", "no lie she screamed at you.", "and her cook yelled, mocked, and teased me, right?", "she sure did. the kitchen girl mocked you.", "and i departed in a rage, right?", "you truly did. my body can prove it because it felt the power of your anger.", "pinch should i try to soothe him by pretending to agree with his lies?", "good idea. his servant here has figured out that agreeing is a good way to cope with his anger.", "adriana you convinced the jeweler to arrest me."], ["for goodness sake, i sent money to bail you out. i gave it to dromio, who rushed in for it.", "you gave money to me? she might have given me her best wishes, master, but she didn't give me one scrap of money.", "didn't you go to her for a purse full of ducats?", "he did, and i gave it to him.", "and i saw her do it.", "i was sent for a rope! god and the rope maker are my witnesses!", "mistress, both the man and his master are possessed. i can tell by how pale and deathlike they look. we must tie them up and leave them in some dark room.", "adriana tell me! why did you lock me out today? dromio of ephesus and why are you denying that you received the gold?", "my sweet husband, i did not lock you out.", "and my sweet master, i received no gold. but i agree, sir, that we were locked out.", "you lying villain! both those statements are false.", "you lying slut, everything you say is false. you're scheming with some damned gang, trying to make a fool of me. with my own bare hands, i'll scratch out your eyes, which want to see me humiliated."], ["tie him up! tie him up! keep him away from me!", "we need more help! the devil in him is strong!", "oh, my, poor man! how pale and listless he looks!", "are you trying to kill me? jailer, i'm your prisoner. are you going to let them break me out of jail?", "gentlemen, let go of him. he's my prisoner and you can't have him.", "tie up the servant, for he is mad as well.", "what are you doing, you stupid officer? do you take some kind of pleasure in seeing a sick man harm himself?", "he's my prisoner. if i let him go, i'll have to pay his bail fees myself.", "i'll pay you. take me to the man my husband is in debt to. once i find out what the debt is for, i'll pay it. doctor pinch, please have him brought to my house. what a horrible day!"], ["what a horrible slut!", "master, i'm all tied up for you.", "shut up already, you scoundrel! why are you trying to provoke me?", "you'd rather be tied up for nothing? act insane, good master: scream out, \"the devil!\"", "oh my god! the poor souls how strangely they talk!", "get him out of here. sister, come with me.", "now tell me. who had him arrested?", "angelo, the jeweler. do you know him?", "i know him. how much does my husband owe?", "two hundred ducats.", "for what?", "for a necklace your husband had him make.", "he said he was going to buy me a necklace, but i never saw it."], ["today your husband came to my place, completely furious. he took my ring, which i just saw on his finger, by the way. right after that, i saw him with a necklace.", "maybe so, but i never saw it. jailer, bring me to the jeweler. i need to hear the truth about all this.", "god have mercy on us! they broke loose!", "and they've got their swords unsheathed! let's call for help and get them tied up again!", "let's get out of here! they'll kill us!", "it looks like these witches are scared of swords.", "the one who claims to be your wife just ran away from you.", "go to the centaur and get our stuff. i wish we were safely on board our ship already.", "look, let's stay here tonight. nobody will hurt us. you see how kind everyone is to us, how they just hand us gold. i think this country is so kind that if it weren't for"], ["that mountain of insanity that wants to marry me, i could find it in my heart to stay here and become a witch myself.", "i wouldn't stay here tonight for the entire town. go and get our stuff onto the ship."], ["i'm sorry that i delayed you, sir. but even though he denies it, i swear he got the necklace from me.", "what's this man's reputation like here in the city?", "people think very highly of him. the merchants give him unlimited credit. he's well beloved, second to none in the city. i'd trust him with everything i own.", "speak more quietly: i think he's coming this way.", "you're right. and that necklace around his neck is the very one he swore he didn't have! good sir, stay close to me. i'll speak to him. signior antipholus, i can't believe you'd put me to this kind of shame and trouble not to mention the scandal you've brought on yourself. you swore i never gave you the necklace, but now you're wearing it openly. not only has your lie cost you money, shame, and imprisonment, but you've also mistreated this honest friend of mine. if it hadn't been for this dispute, he would have already hoisted sail and left for sea. you got that necklace from me: can you deny that?"], ["i got it from you i never said i didn't.", "yes, you did, sir. in fact, you swore it.", "who heard me do that?", "my own ears heard it, and you know it. to hell with you! it's a shame that you walk the streets with all the honest men.", "you're a villain to say this about me. i'll prove that i'm an honest man and a man of honor if you dare defend yourself.", "i do dare, and i say that you are the villain.", "second merchant wait! don't hurt him, for god's sake! he's crazy! somebody approach him and take away his sword. tie up dromio, too, and take them to my house.", "run, master, run. for god's sake, find a house to duck into. this looks like an abbey. go in, or we're done for."], ["be quiet, people! why have you come here in such a mob?", "to get my poor, mad husband out from inside there. let us in so we can tie him up tight and bring him home to recover.", "second merchant i knew he wasn't quite in his right mind.", "angelo now i'm sorry i raised my sword against him.", "how long has he been possessed like this?", "this week he was sad, moody, and depressed and very different from his usual self. but it wasn't until this afternoon that he broke out into violence.", "did he lose a lot of money in a shipwreck? has a close friend of his died? has he fallen in love with another woman? that's a sin young men often commit because they allow their eyes to wander. which of these bad things happened to him?", "none of them, except the last one. he fell in love, and that made him leave home often.", "you should have reprimanded him for that.", "i did.", "fine, but you weren't harsh enough."], ["i was as harsh as i could be while still being a lady.", "you scolded him in private?", "and in public too.", "fine, but not enough.", "it was all we talked about. i kept him awake at night talking about it. he couldn't eat without me talking about it. when we were alone, it was the only thing i talked about, and when we were with other people, i often found a way to mention it. all i ever did was tell him how hurtful and bad it was.", "and that's why he went crazy. a jealous woman's poisonous ranting is worse than the bite of a rabid dog. you disturbed his sleep with your complaining, which is why he's disoriented. you seasoned his food with screams. stress during mealtime ruins the digestion, and that gave him a raging fever. fever, as we know, is a kind of madness. you spoiled his fun by fighting with him, and when people can't enjoy themselves, they grow moody and dull with melancholy they come very close to being grim and cheerlessly depressed. next thing you know, all kinds of terrible illnesses break out. ruining his meals, his enjoyment, and his sleep would drive any man or beast mad. what i'm saying is, your jealousy has pushed your husband away from his sanity."], ["she was always gentle when she scolded him, even when he behaved in the worst and wildest ways. adriana why won't you defend yourself against this woman?", "she has tricked me into seeing my own faults. gentlemen, go in there and grab him.", "nobody goes into my house!", "then have your servants bring him out.", "no: he came here for , and that will protect him from you. i'll try to bring him back to his right mind and work to the end of my abilities to do so.", "it's my place to take care of my husband and nurse him back to health. it is my duty and mine alone. so let me take him home.", "be patient. i'm not going to let him leave until i've tried every means to cure him. with my healthful potions, drugs, and holy prayers, i'll make him a complete man again. healing is part and parcel of my religious vows; it is a charitable duty my order performs. therefore, depart, and leave him here with me.", "i will not depart and leave my husband here. it doesn't suit your holiness to separate a husband and his wife."], ["be quiet and depart. you're not going to take him.", "go lodge a complaint about this with the duke.", "come with me. i'll fall at his feet and lie there until my pleading and crying convinces the duke to come here and force my husband to leave this abbey.", "it's almost five o'clock. the duke will pass by here soon. he always passes here on his way to that melancholy place where criminals are put to death. it's just behind this abbey.", "why is he going there today?", "to see an elderly, unlucky merchant from syracuse publicly beheaded for breaking the law and coming here to ephesus.", "here they come. we will watch the execution.", "kneel down to the duke before he passes by the abbey.", "one more time, we proclaim this publicly: if anyone will pay this man's bail, he will not be put to death. this is how well we regard him."], ["duke, the abbess has wronged me and i seek justice.", "she's a virtuous and holy lady. she can't possibly have done you any wrong.", "your highness, you were the one who introduced me to my husband, antipholus, and suggested i marry him. on this terrible day, a most outrageous fit of madness possessed him. it made him run desperately through the streets with his servant, who is just as mad. he angered all the citizens by rushing into their houses and taking rings, jewels, and anything else he felt like. at one point i managed to get him tied up and sent home so that i could make some order out of all the trouble he caused. but somehow, he broke free from his guards. then he and his crazy servant found us and chased us away with swords. we got more help and came back to capture them, but then they fled into this abbey. we tried to go in, but the abbess stopped us. she wouldn't let us get him and she wouldn't send him out. so please, most gracious duke, order her to bring him out so we can get him some help.", "a long time ago your husband was a soldier in the wars i led. and when you married him and made him the master of your bed, i gave you my word that i would do everything i possibly could for him."], ["go, knock on the gate and bid the abbess come out here and speak to me. i'll settle this before i go", "mistress! run and save yourself. my master and his servant broke loose. they've beaten the maids and tied up doctor pinch. then they set fire to his beard and threw sewage to put out the flames. my master keeps telling the doctor to relax, while his servant cuts the doctor's hair in a ridiculous fashion. if you don't send some help, they'll kill doctor pinch.", "shut up, fool! your master and his servant are here. you're telling a lie.", "mistress, i swear on my life that it's true. it was just moments ago. he's crying out for you and swears he'll burn your face and disfigure you if he can get ahold of you.", "listen, listen! i hear him, mistress. run, get out of here!", "adriana stand with me. don't be scared. guards, get your weapons!"], ["oh, my, it's my husband. look, he can become invisible. just now we put him in the abbey over here, and now he's over there. it's impossible to understand.", "justice, gracious duke. please bring me justice! a long time ago i did good service to you. i fought in your wars and took deep wounds to save your life. in exchange for the blood i shed for you then, i ask you for justice now.", "the fear of death might be making me senile, but i think i see my son antipholus, and dromio.", "sweet prince, i want justice from that woman there. this woman that you urged me to marry has abused me and dishonored me, doing the most injury possible. the things she has shamelessly hurled on me are beyond imagination.", "tell me the details. you know i'll be fair.", "today, great duke, she locked me out of my house and feasted there with whores.", "that's terrible! adriana tell us, woman, did you do that?", "no, my good lord. i ate with him and my sister. damn my soul if these accusations are true!", "if she's lying, i pray that i never sleep again at night or wake up during the day."], ["oh, lying woman! both of them are liars: the madman accuses them justly.", "my lord, i know what i'm saying. i'm not drunk, and i haven't gone mad from anger even though the wrongs done to me today would drive any man insane. this woman locked me out of the house today at lunchtime, and if he weren't conspiring with her, this jeweler could confirm my story since he was with me at the time. he left to fetch a necklace and he promised to bring it to the porcupine, where i was dining with balthasar. he hadn't arrived by the time we finished eating, so i went out looking for him. i met him in the street he was there with that man. second merchant that's when this lying jeweler swore that he had already given me the necklace, which, god knows, he hadn't. he had me arrested for it, and i went with the officer, sending my servant home to get money for the bail. when my servant returned empty-handed, i politely asked the officer to accompany me to my house. on the way, we came across my wife, her sister, and their gang of vile associates. one of them was a man named pinch: a hungry, narrow-faced villain; a skeleton; a fraud; a raggedy magician and fortune-teller; a needy, hollow-eyed, emaciated wretch; a walking corpse. he pretended to be some kind of sorcerer, and he gazed in my eyes and took my pulse. then, with his thin face leering down at mine, he cried out that i was possessed."], ["then they all pounced on me, tied me up, carried me away, and left me in a dark, dank cellar in my house. they left me and my servant there, tied together. eventually i chewed through the ropes and freed myself, and i immediately ran to find you, your grace. i beg you: grant me justice for the deep shame i have suffered and the terrible wrongs done to me.", "your highness, i can confirm this much: he was locked out of his house and didn't eat at home.", "but did he receive a necklace from you?", "he did, my lord. and when he ran in here, everyone could see that he was wearing that necklace.", "besides, i'll swear i heard you confess that you receive the necklace, even after you swore at the marketplace that you hadn't. that's when i raised my sword against you, and you fled into this abbey which, i think, you must have escaped from through some kind of trick.", "i was never inside this abbey, and you never raised your sword against me. i never saw the necklace, so help me heaven! everything you charge me with is untrue.", "why, what a complicated case this is! i think you all must have drunk some kind of potion that's turned you all into animals. adriana if you put him in the abbey, that's where he'd be. if he were insane, he wouldn't be pleading his case so sensibly. you say he"], ["ate at home, but the jeweler says he didn't. , what do you have to say?", "sir, he ate with this woman at the porcupine.", "he did, and he snatched my ring right off my finger.", "that's true, my lord: i did get this ring from her.", "did you see him enter this abbey?", "as clearly as i see you, my lord.", "this is very odd. get the abbess out here. i think you're all either bewildered or stark raving mad.", "mighty duke, please allow me to say something. i think i see a friend who will pay my bail and save my life.", "feel free to say what you wish, syracusian.", "antipholus of ephesus isn't your name antipholus? and isn't that dromio, the man bound to you?", "i was bound to him an hour ago, sir, but thankfully he chewed through our ropes. now i'm dromio and no longer attached to him.", "i'm sure you both remember me.", "actually, it's ourselves you bring to mind since just a few moments ago we were tied up, as you are now. you're not one of pinch's patients, are you, sir?"], ["why are you looking at me so strangely? you know me well.", "i never saw you before in my life.", "oh, grief has transformed me since the last time you saw me. time has the power to deform people, and the sorrowful hours i have spent in his company have put these strange lines and wrinkles on my face. but tell me this: don't you know my voice?", "no.", "don't you, dromio?", "no sir, trust me, i do not.", "i am sure you do.", "fine, sir, but i'm sure i don't. and you're in no position to doubt my word.", "you don't know my voice? oh, severe time! have you mangled my tongue so badly in these seven short years that my only son can no longer recognize my weak, sorrow-ravaged voice? it's true: this aged face of mine is hidden by a snow white beard, and the blood is freezing in my veins. but i still have a little memory left, and there's still some fire in my eyes; my dull, deaf ears can still hear a little. all these aging faculties tell me and i cannot be wrong that you are my son, antipholus."], ["i never saw my father in my life.", "you know that we parted only seven years ago, in syracuse. maybe you're ashamed to admit that you know me because i'm a prisoner now.", "the duke and everyone who knows me in this city can confirm that's not true. i've never been to syracuse in my life.", "i tell you, syracusian. i've been looking after antipholus for twenty years, and during that time he's never been to syracuse. your old age and the prospect of death are making you imagine things.", "mighty duke, look here and see a man who's been treated most terribly!", "either my eyes deceive me, or i see two husbands.", "antipholus one of these men is the other's genius. dromio and the same with these two. but which is the man and which is the ? can anyone tell?", "i, sir, am dromio. command this man to leave."], ["i, sir, am dromio. pray, let me stay.", "you are egeon, aren't you? or are you his ghost?", "oh, my old master! who tied him up?", "whoever tied him up, i will loosen the ropes, and with his freedom i will gain a husband. tell us, old egeon: are you the man who once had a wife named emilia, who gave birth to two fair sons? oh, if you are the same egeon, speak now, and speak to that same emilia!", "why, now the story the merchant told me this morning is starting to make sense. these two antipholuses, who look so alike and these two dromios, who seem to have the same face and her story of being shipwrecked why, these two are the parents of these children and have been reunited by accident.", "if i'm not dreaming, you are emilia. if it's really you, tell me what happened to our son, who floated away with you on that deadly raft.", "some men from epidamnum rescued me, our son, and dromio. but then a gang of violent fishermen from corinth kidnapped dromio and my son and carried them away. i don't know what became of them. you can see what became of me.", "antipholus, aren't you originally from corinth?"], ["no, sir. i came from syracuse.", "wait, don't stand next to each other. i can't tell who's who.", "i came from corinth, your highness.", "and i came with him.", "your renowned uncle, duke menaphon, the famous soldier, brought me here.", "which of you two ate lunch with me today?", "i did, kind lady.", "and you're my husband, right?", "no, he's not. i say no to that.", "so do i, although she called me her husband. and this beautiful gentlewoman, her sister, called me brother. luciana if all this is for real, i hope i'll get the chance to make good on all the things i said to you today.", "that's the necklace i gave you, sir.", "i think it is, sir. i don't deny it.", "and you, sir, had me arrested over that necklace.", "i think i did, sir. i don't deny it."], ["i sent dromio to you with money for bail, but i don't think he brought it to you.", "no, he didn't get any by me.", "i got this purse full of money from you, and my dromio brought it to me. it seems that we kept running into each other's servants all day. and everyone thought i was him, and he was me, and that's how all these errors came about.", "i want to use this money to set my father free.", "that's not necessary. i'm going to let him live.", "sir, i must get that diamond ring back from you.", "there, take it, and thanks for taking such good care of me.", "renowned duke, please join us in the abbey, where we will discuss at length all that has happened to us. everyone assembled here who has been troubled by the day's events join us as well, and we will straighten everything out. my sons, waiting to hear news of you has been like a second childbirth: this time, my labor lasted thirty-three years, and i am only now delivered of my heavy burden. duke solinus, my husband, and both my children and you two dromios, who marked the day of my sons' births with your own come into the abbey with me for a new christening. after such a long period of grief, we will have such a celebration!", "with all my heart, i'll join you."], ["antipholus of ephesus master, should i go get your luggage off the ship?", "dromio, what stuff of mine did you put on a ship?", "the stuff you had at the centaur, sir.", "he means me. i'm your master, dromio. come inside with us: we'll deal with that later. embrace your brother there, and rejoice with him.", "you have a fat friend at your master's house: she took care of me in the kitchen today, thinking i was you. i guess now she's going to be my sister-in-law and not my wife.", "i think you're my mirror, not my brother. and i can see by looking at you that i'm a pretty good-looking fellow. do you want to go in and join the party?", "after you, sir. you're older than me.", "that's a good point. how can we tell which of us is the oldest?", "we'll draw straws. meanwhile, after you.", "no, i'll tell you what. we came into the world as brother and brother, so now let's enter hand in hand not one before the other."]], [["who's there?", "no, who are stop and identify yourself.", "long live the king!", "is that barnardo?", "yes, it's me.", "you've come right on time.", "the clock's just striking twelve. go home to bed, francisco.", "thanks for letting me go. it's bitterly cold out, and i'm depressed.", "has it been a quiet night?", "i haven't even heard a mouse squeak.", "well, good night. if you happen to see horatio and marcellus, who are supposed to stand guard with me tonight, tell them to hurry.", "i think i hear them. stop! who's there?"], ["friends of this country.", "and servants of the danish king.", "good night to you both.", "good-bye. who's taken over the watch for you?", "barnardo's taken my place. good night.", "hello, barnardo.", "hello. is horatio here too?", "more or less.", "welcome, horatio. welcome, marcellus.", "so, tell us, did you see that thing again tonight?", "i haven't seen anything.", "horatio says we're imagining it, and won't let himself believe anything about this horrible thing that we've seen twice now. that's why i've begged him to come on our shift tonight, so that if the ghost appears he can see what we see and speak to it.", "oh, nonsense. it's not going to appear."], ["sit down for a while, and we'll tell you again the story you don't want to believe, about what we've seen two nights now.", "well, let's sit down and listen to barnardo tell us.", "last night, when that star to the west of the north star had traveled across the night sky to that point where it's shining now, at one o'clock, marcellus and i", "quiet, shut up! it's come again.", "looking just like the dead king.", "horatio you're well-educated, horatio. say something to it.", "doesn't he look like the king, horatio?", "very much so. it's terrifying.", "it wants us to speak to it.", "ask it something, horatio.", "what are you, that you walk out so late at night, looking like the dead king of denmark when he dressed for battle? by god, i order you to speak."], ["it looks like you've offended it.", "look, it's going away.", "stay! speak! speak! i order you, speak!", "it's gone. it won't answer now.", "what's going on, horatio? you're pale and trembling. you agree now that we're not imagining this, don't you? what do you think about it?", "i swear to god, if i hadn't seen this with my own eyes i'd never believe it.", "doesn't it look like the king?", "yes, as much as you look like yourself. the king was wearing exactly this armor when he fought the king of norway. and the ghost frowned just like the king did once when he attacked the poles, traveling on the ice in sleds. it's weird.", "it's happened like this twice before, always at this exact time. he stalks by us at our post like a warrior.", "i don't know exactly how to explain this, but i have a general feeling this means bad news for our country."], ["all right, let's sit down and discuss that question. somebody tell me why this strict schedule of guards has been imposed, and why so many bronze cannons are being manufactured in denmark, and so many weapons bought from abroad, and why the shipbuilders are so busy they don't even rest on sunday. is something about to happen that warrants working this night and day? who can explain this to me?", "i can. or at least i can describe the rumors. as you know, our late king, whom we just now saw as a ghost, was the great rival of fortinbras, king of norway. fortinbras dared him to battle. in that fight, our courageous hamlet (or at least that's how we thought of him) killed old king fortinbras, who on the basis of a valid legal document surrendered all his territories, along with his life, to his conqueror. if our king had lost, he would have had to do the same. but now old fortinbras's young son, also called fortinbras he is bold, but unproven has gathered a bunch of thugs from the lawless outskirts of the country. for some food, they're eager to take on the tough enterprise of securing the lands the elder fortinbras lost."], ["as far as i understand, that's why we're posted here tonight and why there's such a commotion in denmark lately.", "i think that's exactly right that explains why the ghost of the late king would haunt us now, since he caused these wars.", "the ghost is definitely something to worry about. in the high and mighty roman empire, just before the emperor julius caesar was assassinated, corpses rose out of their graves and ran through the streets of rome speaking gibberish. there were shooting stars, and blood mixed in with the morning dew, and threatening signs on the face of the sun. the moon, which controls the tides of the sea, was so eclipsed it almost went completely out. and we've had similar omens of terrible things to come, as if heaven and earth have joined together to warn us what's going to happen.", "wait, look! it has come again. i'll meet it if it's the last thing i do. stay here, you hallucination!", "if you have a voice or can make sounds, speak to me."], ["if there's any good deed i can do that will bring you peace and me honor, speak to me. if you have some secret knowledge of your country's sad fate which might be avoided if we knew about it then, please, speak. or if you've got some buried treasure somewhere, which they say often makes ghosts restless, then tell us about it. stay and speak!", "keep it from leaving, marcellus.", "should i strike it with my spear?", "yes, if it doesn't stand still.", "it's over here.", "there it is.", "it's gone. we were wrong to threaten it with violence, since it looks so much like a king. besides, we can't hurt it anymore than we can hurt the air. our attack was stupid, futile, and wicked.", "it was about to say something when the rooster crowed."], ["and then it acted startled, like a guilty person caught by the law. i've heard that the rooster awakens the god of day with its trumpetlike crowing, and makes all wandering ghosts, wherever they are, hurry back to their hiding places. we've just seen proof of that.", "yes, it faded away when the rooster crowed. some people say that just before christmas the rooster crows all night long, so that no ghost dares go wandering, and the night is safe. the planets have no sway over us, fairies' spells don't work, and witches can't bewitch us. that's how holy that night is.", "yes, i've heard the same thing and sort of believe it. but look, morning is breaking beyond that hill in the east, turning the sky red. let's interrupt our watch and go tell young hamlet what we've seen tonight. i'm sure this ghost that's so silent with us will speak to him. don't you agree that we owe it to him to tell him about this, out of duty and love?", "let's do it. i know where we'll find him this morning."], ["although i still have fresh memories of my brother the elder hamlet's death, and though it was proper to mourn him throughout our kingdom, life still goes on i think it's wise to mourn him while also thinking about my own well being. therefore, i've married my former sister-in-law, the queen, with mixed feelings of happiness and sadness. i know that in marrying gertrude i'm only doing what all of you have wisely advised all along for which i thank you. now, down to business. you all know what's happening. young fortinbras, underestimating my strength or imagining that the death of the king has thrown my country into turmoil, dreams of getting the better of me, and never stops pestering me with demands that i surrender the territory his father lost to the elder hamlet, my dead brother-in-law. so much for fortinbras.", "now, here's what needs to be done."], ["i've written to fortinbras's uncle, the present head of norway, an old bedridden man who knows next to nothing about his nephew's plans. i've told the uncle to stop those plans, which he has the power to do, since all the troops assembled by young fortinbras are norwegian, and thus under the uncle's control. i'm giving the job of delivering this letter to you, good cornelius, and you, voltemand. your business in norway will be limited to this task. now good-bye. show your loyalty by leaving quickly, rather than with elaborate speeches.", "we'll do our duty to you in that and everything else.", "i have no doubt you will. good-bye.", "and now, laertes, what do you have to tell me? you have a favor you to ask of me. what is it, laertes? you'll never waste your words when talking to the king of denmark. what could you ever ask for that i wouldn't give you? your father and the danish throne are as close as the mind and the heart, or the hand and the mouth. what would you like, laertes?", "my lord, i want your permission to go back to france, which i left to come to denmark for your coronation. i confess, my thoughts are on france, now that my duty is done. please, let me go."], ["do you have your father's permission? what does polonius say?", "my son has worn me down by asking me so many times. in the end i grudgingly consented. i beg you, let him go.", "in that case, leave when you like, laertes, and spend your time however you wish. i hereby grant your request, and hope you have a good time. and now, hamlet, my nephew and my son", "too many family ties there for me.", "why are you still so gloomy, with a cloud hanging over you?", "it's not true, sir. your son is out in the sun.", "my dear hamlet, stop wearing these black clothes, and be friendly to the king. you can't spend your whole life with your eyes to the ground remembering your noble father. it happens all the time, what lives must die eventually, passing to eternity.", "yes, mother, it happens all the time.", "so why does it seem so particular to you?"], ["\"seem,\" mother? no, it . i don't know what you mean by \"seem.\" neither my black clothes, my dear mother, nor my heavy sighs, nor my weeping, nor my downcast eyes, nor any other display of grief can show what i really feel. it's true that all these things \"seem\" like grief, since a person could use them to fake grief if he wanted to. but i've got more real grief inside me that you could ever see on the surface. these clothes are just a hint of it.", "hamlet, you are so sweet and such a good son to mourn your father like this. but you have to remember, that your father lost his father, who lost his father before him, and every time, each son has had to mourn his father for a certain period. but overdoing it is just stubborn. it's not manly. it's not what god wants, and it betrays a vulnerable heart and an ignorant and weak mind. since we know that everyone must die sooner or later, why should we take it to heart? you're committing a crime against heaven, against the dead, and against nature. and it's irration-al, since the truth is that all fathers must die. please give up this useless mourning of yours and start thinking of me as your new father."], ["because everyone knows that you are the man closest to this throne, and i love you just as much as any father loves his son. and your plans for going back to wittenberg are not what i want. i'm asking you now to stay here in my company as the number-one member of my court, my nephew and now my son too.", "please answer my prayers, hamlet, and stay with us. don't go back to wittenberg.", "i'll obey you as well as i can, ma'am.", "that's the right answer it shows your love. stay in denmark like us. my dear wife, come. hamlet's agreeing to stay makes me happy, and every merry toast i'll drink today will be heard as far as the clouds overhead. my drinking will be echoed in the heavens. let's go.", "ah, i wish my dirty flesh could melt away into a vapor, or that god had not made a law against suicide. oh god, god! how tired, stale, and pointless life is to me. damn it! it's like a garden that no one's taking care of, and that's growing wild. only nasty weeds grow in it now. i can't believe it's come to this. my father's only been dead for two months no, not even two. such an excellent king, as superior to my uncle as a god is to a beast, and so loving toward my mother that he kept the wind from blowing too hard on her face."], ["oh god, do i have to remember that? she would hang on to him, and the more she was with him the more she wanted to be with him; she couldn't get enough of him. yet even so, within a month of my father's death (i don't even want to think about it. oh women! you are so weak!), even before she had broken in the shoes she wore to his funeral, crying like crazy even an animal would have mourned its mate longer than she did! there she was marrying my uncle, my father's brother, who's about as much like my father as i'm like hercules. less than a month after my father's death, even before the tears on her cheeks had dried, she remarried. oh, so quick to jump into a bed of incest! that's not good, and no good can come of it either. but my heart must break in silence, since i can't mention my feelings aloud.", "hello, sir.", "nice to see you again, horatio that is your name, right?", "that's me, sir. still your respectful servant.", "not my servant, but my friend. i'll change that name for you. but what are you doing so far from wittenberg, horatio? oh, marcellus?", "hello, sir."], ["marcellus so nice to see you. barnardo hello, sir. horatio but what are you doing away from wittenberg, horatio?", "i felt like skipping school, sir.", "i wouldn't allow your enemies to say that, and i won't believe it from you. i know you'd never skip school. what are you doing here in elsinore? i'll teach you to drink hard by the time you leave.", "sir, we came to see your father's funeral.", "please, don't make fun of me. i think you came to see my mother's wedding instead.", "well, sir, it's true it came soon after.", "it was all about saving a few bucks, horatio. the leftovers from the funeral dinner made a convenient wedding banquet. oh, i'd rather have met my fiercest enemy in heaven, horatio, than have lived through that terrible day! my father i think i see my father.", "where, sir?", "in my imagination, horatio.", "i saw him once. he was an admirable king.", "he was a great human being. he was perfect in everything. i'll never see the likes of him again."], ["sir, i think i saw him last night.", "saw who?", "your father, sir. the dead king.", "the king my father?!", "don't get too excited yet, sir. just listen carefully while i tell you the amazing thing i saw, with these gentlemen as witnesses.", "for god's sake, let me hear it.", "after midnight, for two nights running, these two guards, marcellus and barnardo, saw a figure that looked very much like your father, in full armor from head to toe. it just appeared before them and marched past them with slow dignity three times, a staff's distance from their amazed eyes, while they turned, quaking with fear and too shocked to speak. they told me all about this, so on the third night i agreed to come stand guard with them, to see for myself. it happened again, just as they had described. i knew your father. this ghost looked as much like him as my two hands are like each other.", "but where did this happen?"], ["on the platform where we stand guard, sir.", "didn't you talk to it?", "i did, sir, but it didn't answer me. it raised its head once as if it was about to speak, but just then the rooster started crowing, and the ghost vanished from sight.", "that's very strange.", "i swear to god it's true, sir. we thought you ought to know about it.", "yes, i should know, but it disturbs me. are you on duty again tonight?", "yes, sir.", "it was armed, you say?", "armed, sir.", "from head to toe?", "yes, from top to bottom, sir.", "so you couldn't see his face, then?", "oh, yes, we could, sir. he had his helmet visor up."], ["was he frowning?", "he looked more sad than angry.", "was he pale or flushed and red-faced?", "very pale, sir.", "did he stare at you?", "the whole time.", "i wish i'd been there.", "you would have been very shocked.", "i'm sure i would have. did it stay a long time?", "about as long as it would take someone to count slowly to a hundred.", "no, longer than that.", "not the time i saw it.", "his beard was gray, right?", "it was just like in real life, dark brown with silver whiskers in it.", "i'll stand guard with you tonight. maybe it'll come again.", "i bet it will."], ["if it looks like my good father, i'll speak to it, even if hell itself opens up and tells me to be quiet. i ask you, if you've kept this a secret, keep doing so. whatever happens tonight, don't talk about it. i'll return the favor. so good-bye for now. i'll see you on the guards' platform between eleven and twelve tonight.", "we'll do our duty to you, sir.", "give me your love instead, as i give you mine. good-bye.", "my father's ghost armed! something's wrong. i suspect some foul play. i wish the night were here already! until then, i have to remain calm. bad deeds will be revealed, no matter how people try to hide them."], ["my belongings are on the ship already. good-bye. and, my dear sister, as long as the winds are blowing and ships are sailing, let me hear from you write.", "do you doubt i'll write?", "as for hamlet and his attentions to you, just consider it a big flirtation, the temporary phase of a hot-blooded youth. it won't last. it's sweet, but his affection will fade after a minute. not a second more.", "no more than a minute?", "try to think of it like that, anyway. when a youth grows into a man, he doesn't just get bigger in his body his responsibilities grow too. he may love you now, and may have only the best intentions, but you have to be on your guard. remember that he belongs to the royal family, and his intentions don't matter that much he's a slave to his family obligations. he can't simply make personal choices for himself the way common people can, since the whole country depends on what he does. his choice has to agree with what the nation wants."], ["so if he says he loves you, you should be wise enough to see that his words only mean as much as the state of denmark allows them to mean. then think about how shameful it would be for you to give in to his seductive talk and surrender your treasure chest to his greedy hands. watch out, ophelia. just keep your love under control, and don't let yourself become a target of his lust. simply exposing your beauty to the moon at night is risky enough you don't have to expose yourself to him. even good girls sometimes get a bad reputation. worms ruin flowers before they blossom. baby blooms are most susceptible to disease. so be careful. fear will keep you safe. young people often lose their self-control even without any help from others.", "i'll keep your words of wisdom close to my heart. but, my dear brother, don't be like a bad priest who fails to practice what he preaches, showing me the steep and narrow way to heaven while you frolic on the primrose path of sin.", "don't worry, i won't.", "i've been here too long. and here comes father. what good luck, to have him bless my leaving not once but twice."], ["you're still here? shame on you get on board! the wind is filling your ship's sail, and they're waiting for you. here, i give you my blessing again. and just try to remember a few rules of life. don't say what you're thinking, and don't be too quick to act on what you think. be friendly to people but don't overdo it. once you've tested out your friends and found them trustworthy, hold onto them. but don't waste your time shaking hands with every new guy you meet. don't be quick to pick a fight, but once you're in one, hold your own. listen to many people, but talk to few. hear everyone's opinion, but reserve your judgment. spend all you can afford on clothes, but make sure they're quality, not flashy, since clothes make the man which is doubly true in france. don't borrow money and don't lend it, since when you lend to a friend, you often lose the friendship as well as the money, and borrowing turns a person into a spendthrift. and, above all, be true to yourself. then you won't be false to anybody else. good-bye, son. i hope my blessing will help you absorb what i've said.", "i humbly say good-bye to you, father.", "now go, the time is right. your servants are waiting.", "good-bye, ophelia. remember what i've told you."], ["it's locked away in my memory, and you've got the key.", "good-bye.", "what did he tell you, ophelia?", "something about hamlet.", "a good thing he did, by god. i've heard hamlet's been spending a lot of time alone with you recently, and you've made yourself quite available to him. if things are the way people tell me they are and they're only telling me this to warn me then i have to say, you're not conducting yourself with the self-restraint a daughter of mine should show. what's going on between you two? tell me the truth.", "he's offered me a lot of affection lately.", "\"affection!\" that's nothing! you're talking like some innocent girl who doesn't understand the ways of the world. do you believe his \"offers,\" as you call them?", "i don't know what to believe, father.", "then i'll tell you. believe that you are a foolish little baby for believing these \"offers\" are something real. offer yourself more respect, or not to beat this word to death you'll offer me the chance to be a laughing-stock."], ["father, he's always talked about love in an honorable fashion", "yes, \"fashion\" is just the word a passing whim. go on.", "and he's made the holiest vows to me, to back up what he says.", "these vows are just traps for stupid birds. i know when a man is on fire, he'll swear anything. but when a heart's on fire, it gives out more light than heat, and the fire will be out even before he's done making his promises. don't mistake that for true love. from now on, spend a little less time with him and talk to him less. make yourself a precious commodity. remember that hamlet is young and has a lot more freedom to fool around than you do. in short, ophelia, don't believe his love vows, since they're like flashy pimps who wear nice clothes to lead a woman into filthy acts. to put it plainly, don't waste your time with hamlet. do as i say. now come along.", "i'll do as you say, father."], ["the air is biting cold.", "yes, it's definitely nippy.", "what time is it?", "a little before twelve, i think.", "no, it's just after twelve; i heard the clock strike.", "really? i didn't hear it. so it's nearly the time when the ghost likes to appear.", "what does that mean, sir?", "the king is staying up all night drinking and dancing. as he guzzles down his german wine, the musicians make a ruckus to celebrate his draining another cup.", "is that a tradition?", "yes, it is. but though i was born here and should consider that tradition part of my own heritage, i think it would be better to ignore it than practice it. other countries criticize us for our loud partying."], ["they call us drunks and insult our noble titles. and our drunkenness does detract from our achievements, as great as they are, and lessens our reputations. it's just like what happens to certain people who have some birth defect (which they are not responsible for, since nobody chooses how he's born), or some weird habit or compulsion that changes them completely. it happens sometimes that one little defect in these people, as wonderful and talented as they may be, will make them look completely bad to other people. a tiny spot of evil casts doubt on their good qualities and ruins their reputations.", "look, sir here it comes!", "oh angels, protect us! whether you're a good spirit or a cursed demon, whether you bring heavenly breezes or blasts of hell fire, whether your intentions are good or evil, you look so strange i want to talk to you. i'll call you \"hamlet senior,\" \"king,\" \"father,\" \"royal dane.\" answer me! don't drive me crazy with curiosity, but tell me why your church-buried bones have burst out of their coffin, and why your tomb,"], ["where we quietly buried you, has opened up its heavy marble jaws to spit you out again. what could it mean that you have put on your armor again, you corpse, and have come back to look at the moon, making the night terrifying and stirring us humans with supernatural fears? why? what do you want from us? what should we do?", "it wants you to go off with it, as if it wants to tell you something alone.", "look how politely it's pointing you to a place that's farther away. but don't go.", "definitely not.", "it's not going to speak, so i'll follow it.", "don't do it, sir.", "why, what's the danger? i don't value my life one bit. and as for my soul, how can the ghost endanger that, since it's as immortal as the ghost is? look, it's waving me over again. i'll follow it.", "what if it tempts you to jump into the sea, sir? or to the terrifying cliff that overhangs the water,"], ["where it takes on some other horrible form that drives you insane. think about it. the edge of the sea makes people feel despair even at the best of times. all they have to do is look into its depths and hear it roar far below.", "it's still waving to me. go ahead, i'll follow.", "you're not going, sir.", "let go of me.", "calm down. you're not going anywhere.", "it's my fate calling me. every nerve in my body is now as tough as steel. the ghost is still waving me over. let me go, gentlemen. i swear, if anyone holds me back, i'll make a ghost of him! i say, get away! go ahead, i'll follow you.", "his imagination is making him crazy.", "let's follow them. it's not right to obey his orders to let him go alone.", "go ahead and follow him. but what does all this mean, where will it all end?"], ["it means that something is rotten in the state of denmark.", "if that's true, we should let god take care of it.", "no, let's follow him."], ["where are you taking me? speak. i'm not going any farther.", "listen to me.", "i will.", "the hour has almost come when i have to return to the horrible flames of purgatory.", "ah, poor ghost!", "don't pity me. just listen carefully to what i have to tell you.", "speak. i'm ready to hear you.", "you must be ready for revenge, too, when you hear me out.", "what?", "i'm the ghost of your father, doomed for a certain period of time to walk the earth at night, while during the day i'm trapped in the fires of purgatory until i've done penance for my past sins. if i weren't forbidden to tell you the secrets of , i could tell you stories that would slice through your soul, freeze your blood,"], ["make your eyes jump out of their sockets, and your hair stand on end like porcupine quills. but mortals like you aren't allowed to hear this description of the afterlife. listen, listen! if you ever loved your poor dear father", "oh god!", "take revenge for his horrible murder, that crime against nature.", "murder?", "his most horrible murder. murder's always horrible, but this one was especially horrible, weird, and unnatural.", "hurry and tell me about it, so i can take revenge right away, faster than a person falls in love.", "i'm glad you're eager. you'd have to be as lazy as a weed on the shores of not to get riled up here. now listen, hamlet. everyone was told that a poisonous snake bit me when i was sleeping in the orchard. but in fact, that's a lie that's fooled everyone in denmark. you should know, my noble son, the real snake that stung your father is now wearing his crown.", "i knew it! my uncle?"], ["yes, that incestuous, adulterous animal. with his clever words and fancy gifts, he seduced my seemingly virtuous queen, persuading her to give in to his lust. they were evil words and gifts to seduce her like that! oh, hamlet, how far she fell! she went from me, who loved her with the dignity and devotion that suits a legitimate marriage, to a wretch whose natural gifts were poor compared to mine. but just as you can't corrupt a truly virtuous person no matter how you try, the opposite is also true: a lustful person like her can satisfy herself in a heavenly union and then move on to garbage. but hang on, i think i smell the morning air. so let me be brief here. your uncle snuck up to me while i was sleeping in the orchard, as i always used to do in the afternoon, and poured a vial of henbane poison into my ear that poison that moves like quicksilver through the veins and curdles the blood, which is just what it did to me. i broke out in a scaly rash that covered my smooth body with a revolting crust. and that's how my brother robbed me of my life, my crown, and my queen all at once. he cut me off in the middle of a sinful life."], ["i had no chance to repent my sins or receive last rites. oh, it's horrible, horrible, so horrible! if you are human, don't stand for it. don't let the danish king's bed be a nest of incest. but however you go about your revenge, don't corrupt your mind or do any harm to your mother. leave her to god and her own guilt. now, good-bye. the glowworm's light is beginning to fade, so morning is near. good-bye, good-bye, good-bye. remember me.", "ah, all you up in heaven! and earth! what else? shall i include hell as well? damn it! keep beating, my heart, and muscles, don't grow old yet keep me standing. remember you! yes, you poor ghost, as long as i have any power of memory in this distracted head. remember you! yes, i'll wipe my mind clean of all trivial facts and memories and preserve only your commandment there. yes, by god! oh, you evil woman! oh, you villain, villain, you damned, smiling villain! where's my notebook? it's a good idea for me to write down that one can smile and smile, and be a villain. at least it's possible in denmark. so, uncle, there you are. now it's time to deal with the vow i made to my father."], ["he said, \"remember me.\" i swore i would.", "sir, sir!", "lord hamlet.", "please let him be all right!", "i'm all right.", "oh-ho-ho, sir!", "oh-ho-ho, kid! come here.", "so how did it go, sir?", "what happened, sir?", "it was incredible!", "oh, please, tell us, sir.", "no, you'll talk.", "i swear i won't, sir.", "i won't either, sir.", "okay. but you promise you can keep a secret?", "yes, i swear."], ["any villain in denmark is going to be, well, a villain.", "you don't need a ghost returning from the grave to tell you that, sir.", "yes, you're absolutely right. so, without further ado, the best thing to do now is probably just to shake hands and go our separate ways. you go and take care of your business (since everybody has some business to take care of, whatever it is worth), and i'll go and pray.", "you're talking in such a crazy way, sir.", "i'm sorry if i offended you; yes, very sorry.", "oh, don't worry about it, sir. no offense taken.", "ah, but there is, horatio, there's a lot of offense. as for this ghost we just saw, he's a real one, i can tell you that much. but regarding what happened between us, don't ask i can't tell you. and now, my friends, my courageous and educated friends, do me one small favor.", "what is it, sir? of course we will.", "don't ever tell anyone what you've seen tonight.", "we won't, sir."], ["no, you have to swear it.", "i swear to god i won't.", "me too, i won't, i swear to god.", "swear by my sword.", "but we already swore, sir.", "yes, but swear by my sword this time.", "swear!", "ha ha, is that what you say, kid? are you down there, my man? come on, you hear this guy down in the basement. agree to swear.", "tell us what to swear, sir.", "you swear never to mention what you've seen. swear by my sword.", "swear.", "you're everywhere, aren't you? maybe we should move. come over here, gentlemen, and put your hands on my sword again. swear by my sword you'll never mention what you've heard.", "swear by his sword.", "you said it right, old mole. you're pretty busy down there in the dirt, aren't you? what a tunneler! let's move again, my friends."], ["my god, this is unbelievably strange.", "then give it a nice welcome, as you would give to any stranger. there are more things in heaven and earth, horatio, than you've even dreamed of. but now listen to me. no matter how strangely i act (since i may find it appropriate to act a little crazy in the near future), you must never, ever let on with a gesture of your hands or a certain expression on your face that you know anything about what happened to me here tonight. you must never say anything like, \"ah, yes, just as we suspected,\" or \"we could tell you a thing or two about him,\" or anything like that. swear you won't.", "swear.", "okay, then, unhappy ghost, you can rest now. so, gentlemen, i thank you heartily and with all my love, and i'll repay you however i can some day. let's go back to court together, but , please. no talking about this. there is so much out of whack in these times. and damn the fact that i'm supposed to fix it! come on, let's go."], ["give him this money and these letters, reynaldo.", "i will, sir.", "it would be wonderfully wise of you, my dear reynaldo, to ask around about his behavior a little before you visit him.", "that's what i thought too, sir.", "excellent, very good. ask around and find out what danish people are in paris who they are, where they live and how much money they have, who their friends are. and if you find out in this general sort of questioning that they happen to know my son, you'll find out much more than if you asked specific questions about him. just tell them you vaguely know laertes, say something like, \"i'm a friend of his father and i sort of know him,\" or whatever. do you get what i'm saying, reynaldo?", "yes, very well, sir.", "you should say, \"i sort of know him, but not well. is it the same laertes who's a wild party animal? isn't he the one who's always,\" and so on. then just make up whatever you want of course, nothing so bad that it would shame him. i mean make up any stories that"], ["sound like your average young guy, the kind of trouble they get into.", "like gambling, sir?", "that's right, or drinking, swearing, fist-fighting, visiting prostitutes that kind of thing.", "but that would ruin his reputation!", "oh no, not if you say it right. i don't want you to say he's a sex fiend, that's not what i mean. just mention his faults lightly, so they make him seem like a free spirit who's gone a little too far.", "but, sir", "why should you do this, you want to know?", "yes, sir. i'd like to know.", "well, here's what i'm thinking. (i'm quite proud of myself for coming up with this.) as you talk with someone and hint about my son's faults and little sins, you'll watch his reaction, and if he's ever seen laertes do any of these things, it will only be natural for him to agree with you, at which point he'll call you \"sir,\" or \"my good friend,\" depending on who the person is, where he comes from, and so on."], ["yes, sir.", "and then he'll he'll wait, what was i about to say? good god, i was about to say something. what was i saying?", "at, \"it will be natural for him to agree with you he'll call you sir,' friend,'\" et cetera.", "\"it will be natural for him to agree with you.\" ah, yes, that's right. if he agrees he'll say something like this: \"yes, i know the gentleman you're referring to. i just saw him yesterday,\" or \"the other day,\" or whenever it is, you know, \"and there he was gambling,\" or \"there he was, totally wasted, or fighting with somebody about a tennis match, or going into a house of ill repute\" that means a whorehouse, you know or whatever. make sure your little lie brings out the truth. we're doing this wisely and intelligently, indirectly, finding out things by roundabout means. that's how you'll find out what my son is up to in paris. you get my point, don't you?", "yes, i do, sir.", "god bless you. have a safe trip.", "thank you, sir.", "don't forget to see what he's up to with your own eyes. don't trust gossip.", "i will, sir."], ["and i hope he's studying his music like he's supposed to.", "got it, sir.", "good-bye.", "ophelia, what's the matter?", "oh, father, father, i've just had such a scare!", "from what, in god's name?", "father, i was up in my room sewing when hamlet came in with no hat on his head, his shirt unbuttoned, and his stockings dirty, undone, and down around his ankles. he was pale as his undershirt, and his knees were knocking together. he looked so out of sorts, as if he'd just come back from hell. he came up to me.", "is he crazy with love for you?", "i'm not sure, but i'm afraid he might be.", "what did he say?", "he grabbed me by the wrist and held me hard, then backed away an arm's length and just looked at me, staring at me like an artist about to paint my picture. he stayed like that a long time."], ["finally, after shaking my arm a little, and jerking his head up and down three times, he sighed like it was his last breath. after that he let me go. he left the room with his head turned back on me, finding his way out without looking, since his eyes were on me the whole time.", "come with me. i'll go tell the king about this. this is definitely love-craziness. love is such a violent emotion that it makes people self-destruct, as much as any strong emotion. i'm so sorry. did you tell him anything that might have hurt his feelings lately?", "no, father, but i did what you told me to do and sent back his letters and wouldn't let him visit me.", "that's what made him crazy. i regret not observing him more closely before i told you to do that. i thought he was just toying with you and meant to ruin your reputation. damn my suspicious thoughts! it's as common for us old people to assume we know more than we do as for young people to be too wild and crazy. come on, let's go see the king. we've got to discuss this matter, which could cause more trouble if we keep it secret than if we discuss it openly."], ["welcome, dear rosencrantz and guildenstern. i've wanted to see you for a long time now, but i sent for you so hastily because i need your help right away. you've probably heard about the \"change\" that's come over hamlet that's the only word for it, since inside and out he's different from what he was before. i can't imagine what's made him so unlike himself, other than his father's death. since you both grew up with him and are so familiar with his personality and behavior, i'm asking you to stay a while at court and spend some time with him. see if you can get hamlet to have some fun, and find out if there's anything in particular that's bothering him, so we can set about trying to fix it.", "gentlemen, hamlet's talked a lot about you, and i know there are no two men alive he's fonder of. if you'll be so good as to spend some time with us and help us out, you'll be thanked on a royal scale."], ["both you and the king might have ordered us to execute your command, instead of asking us so politely.", "but we'll obey. our services are entirely at your command.", "thanks, rosencrantz and worthy guildenstern.", "thanks, guildenstern and worthy rosencrantz. i beg you to pay a visit right away to my son, who's changed too much. servants, take these gentlemen to see hamlet.", "i hope to god we can make him happy and do him some good!", "amen to that!", "the ambassadors are back from norway, sir.", "once again you bring good news.", "do i, sir? i assure your majesty i'm only doing my duty both to my god and my good king."], ["and i believe unless this brain of mine is not so politically cunning as it used to be that i've found out why hamlet's gone crazy.", "tell me! i want very much to find out.", "all right, but first let the ambassadors speak. then you can hear my news, as dessert.", "then be so kind as to show them in.", "gertrude, he says he's found out the reason for your son's insanity.", "i doubt it's anything but the obvious reason: his father's dying and our quick marriage.", "well, we'll get to the bottom of it. welcome, my good friends. tell me, voltemand, what's the news from the king of norway?", "greetings to you too, your highness. as soon as we raised the matter, the king sent out messengers to stop his nephew's war preparations, which he originally thought were directed against poland but learned on closer examination were directed against you. he was very upset that fortinbras had taken advantage of his being old and sick to deceive him, and he ordered fortinbras's arrest. fortinbras swore never to threaten denmark again."], ["the old king was so overjoyed by this promise that he gave young fortinbras an annual income of three thousand and permission to lead his soldiers into poland, asking you officially in this letter to allow his troops to pass through your kingdom on their way to poland. he's assuring you of your safety. claudius", "i like this news, and when i have time i'll read this and think about how to reply. meanwhile, thank you for your efforts. go relax now. tonight we'll have dinner. welcome back!", "well, that turned out well in the end. sir and madam, to make grand speeches about what majesty is, what service is, or why day is day, night is night, and time is time is just a waste of a lot of day, night, and time. therefore, since the essence of wisdom is not talking too much, i'll get right to the point here. your son is crazy. \"crazy\" i'm calling it, since how can you say what craziness is except to say that it's craziness? but that's another story.", "please, stick to the point.", "madam, i'm doing nothing but sticking to the point. it's true he's crazy, and it's a shame it's true, and it's truly a shame he's crazy but now i sound foolish, so i'll get right to the point."], ["now, if we agree hamlet's crazy, then the next step is to figure out the cause of this effect of craziness, or i suppose i should say the cause of this defect, since this defective effect is caused by something. this is what we must do, and that's exactly what needs to be done. think about it. i have a daughter (i have her until she gets married) who's given me this letter, considering it her duty. listen and think about this: \"to the heavenly idol of my soul, the most beautified ophelia\" by the way, \"beautified\" sounds bad, it sounds awful, it sounds crude, it's a terrible use of the word. but i'll go on: \"in her excellent white bosom,\" et cetera, et cetera you don't need to hear all this stuff", "hamlet wrote this letter to ophelia?", "madam, please be patient. i'll read it to you. \" , . , . oh, ophelia, i'm bad at poetry. i can't put my feelings into verse, but please believe i love you best, oh, best of all. believe it. , hamlet.\" dutifully and obediently my daughter showed me this letter, and more like it. she's told me all about how hamlet has been courting her all the details of where, and what he said, and when.", "and how did she react to all this?", "sir, what is your opinion of me?"], ["i know you are loyal and honorable.", "i would like to prove to you that i am. but what would you have thought of me if i had kept quiet when i found out about this hot little love (which i noticed even before my daughter told me about it)? my dear queen, what would you have thought of me if i had turned a blind eye to what was happening between hamlet and my daughter? no, i had to do something. and so i said to my daughter: \"lord hamlet is a prince, he's out of your league. you have to end this.\" and then i gave her orders to stay away from him, and not to accept any messages or little gifts from him. she did what i said. when she rejected hamlet, he became sad, and stopped eating, stopped sleeping, got weak, got dizzy, and as a result lost his mind. and that's why he's crazy now, and all of us feel sorry for him.", "gertrude do you think that's why hamlet's crazy?", "it may be, it certainly may be.", "has there ever been a time i'd really like to know when i've definitely said something was true, and it turned out not to be true?", "not that i know of."], ["chop my head off if i'm wrong. i'll follow the clues and uncover the truth, even if it's at the very center of the earth.", "what can we do to find out if it's true?", "well, you know he sometimes walks here in the lobby for four hours at a time.", "yes, he does.", "when he's there next time, i'll send my daughter to see him. (to claudius) you and i will hide behind the and watch what happens. if it turns out that hamlet's not in love after all, and hasn't gone mad from love, then you can fire me from my court job and i'll go work on a farm.", "we'll try what you suggest.", "look how sadly he's coming in, reading his book.", "please go away, both of you. i'll speak to him now. oh, please let me.", "how are you, hamlet?", "fine, thank you.", "do you know who i am?"], ["of course. you sell fish.", "no, not me, sir.", "in that case i wish you were as good a man as a fish seller.", "good, sir?", "yes, sir. only one man in ten thousand is good in this world.", "that's definitely true, my lord.", "since if the sun breeds maggots on a dead dog, kissing the corpse by the way, do you have a daughter?", "i do indeed, my lord.", "then by all means never let her walk in public. procreation is a good thing, but if your daughter gets pregnant look out, friend.", "now, what does he mean by that? still harping on my daughter. but he didn't recognize me at first. he mistook me for a fish seller. he's far gone. but when i was young i went crazy for love too, almost as bad as this. i'll talk to him again. hamlet what are you reading, your highness?", "a lot of words.", "and what is the subject?", "between whom?"], ["i mean, what do the words say?", "oh, just lies, sir. the sly writer says here that old men have gray beards, their faces are wrinkled, their eyes full of gunk, and that they have no wisdom and weak thighs. of course i believe it all, but i don't think it's good manners to write it down, since you yourself, sir, would grow as old as i am, if you could only travel backward like a crab.", "there's a method to his madness. hamlet will you step outside, my lord?", "into my grave.", "well, that's certainly out of this world, all right. his answers are so full of meaning sometimes! he has a way with words, as crazy people often do, and that sane people don't have a talent for. i'll leave him now and arrange a meeting between him and my daughter. hamlet my lord, i'll of you now.", "you can't take anything from me that i care less about except my life, except my life, except my life.", "good-bye, my lord.", "these boring old fools!", "you're looking for lord hamlet. he's right over there."], ["thank you, sir.", "my lord!", "my dear sir!", "ah, my good old friends! how are you, guildenstern? and rosencrantz! boys, how are you both doing?", "oh, as well as anybody.", "happy that we're not too happy, lucky in being not too lucky. we're not exactly at the top of our luck.", "but you're not down and out, either, are you?", "no, we're just somewhere in the middle, my lord.", "so you're around lady luck's waist?", "yes, we're the privates in her army.", "ha, ha, so you've gotten into her private parts? of course lady luck is such a slut. anyway, what's up?", "not much, my lord. just that the world's become honest.", "in that case, the end of the world is approaching. but you're wrong. let me ask you a particular question. what crimes have you committed to be sent here to this prison?"], ["prison, my lord?", "denmark's a prison.", "then i guess the whole world is one.", "yes, quite a large one, with many cells and dungeons, denmark being one of the worst.", "we don't think so, my lord.", "well, then it isn't one to you, since nothing is really good or bad in itself it's all what a person thinks about it. and to me, denmark is a prison.", "that must be because you're so ambitious. it's too small for your large mind.", "small? no, i could live in a walnut shell and feel like the king of the universe. the real problem is that i have bad dreams.", "dreams are a sign of ambition, since ambition is nothing more than the shadow of a dream.", "but a dream itself is just a shadow.", "exactly. in fact, i consider ambition to be so light and airy that it's only the shadow of a shadow.", "then i guess beggars are the ones with bodies, while ambitious kings and heroes are just the shadows of beggars. should we go inside? i seem to be losing my mind a bit.", "we're at your service, whatever you say."], ["no, no, i won't class you with my servants, since to be frank with you my servants are terrible. but tell me as my friends, what are you doing here at elsinore?", "visiting you, my lord. there's no other reason.", "well, then, i thank you, though i'm such a beggar that even my thanks are not worth much. did someone tell you to visit me? or was it just your whim, on your own initiative? come on, tell me the truth.", "what should we say, my lord?", "anything you like, as long as it answers my question. you were sent for. you've got a guilty look on your faces, which you're too honest to disguise. i know the king and queen sent for you.", "why would they do that, my lord?", "that's what i want you to tell me. let me remind you of our old friendship, our youth spent together, the duties of our love for each other, and whatever else will make you answer me straight.", "guildenstern what do you think?", "i've got my eye on you. guildenstern if you care about me, you'll be honest with me.", "my lord, we were sent for."], ["i'll tell you why so you won't have to tell and give away any secrets you have with the king and queen. recently, though i don't know why, i've lost all sense of fun, stopped exercising the whole world feels sterile and empty. this beautiful canopy we call the sky this majestic roof decorated with golden sunlight why, it's nothing more to me than disease-filled air. what a perfect invention a human is, how noble in his capacity to reason, how unlimited in thinking, how admirable in his shape and movement, how angelic in action, how godlike in understanding! there's nothing more beautiful. we surpass all other animals. and yet to me, what are we but dust? men don't interest me. no women neither, but you're smiling, so you must think they do.", "my lord, i wasn't thinking anything like that.", "so why did you laugh when i said that men don't interest me?", "i was just thinking that if people don't interest you, you'll be pretty bored by the actors on their way here. we crossed paths with a drama company just a while ago, and they're coming to entertain you.", "the one who plays the part of the king will be particularly welcome. i'll treat him like a real king. the adventurous knight will wave around his sword and shield, the lover will be rewarded for his sighs, the crazy character can rant all he wants, the clown will make everybody laugh, and the lady character can say whatever's on her mind, or i'll stop the play. which troupe is it?"], ["the tragic actors from the city, the ones you used to enjoy so much.", "what are they doing on the road? they made more money and got more attention in the city.", "but things have changed there, and it's easier for them on the road now.", "are they as popular as they used to be when i lived in the city? do they attract big audiences?", "no, not like before.", "why? are they getting rusty?", "no, they're busy and as excellent as ever. the problem is that they have to compete with a group of children who yell out their lines and receive outrageous applause for it. these child actors are now in fashion, and they've so overtaken the public theaters that society types hardly come at all, they're so afraid of being mocked by the playwrights who write for the boys."], ["what, you mean kid actors? who takes care of them? who pays their way? will they stop working when their voices mature? aren't the playwrights hurting them by making them upstage adult actors, which they are going to grow up and become? (unless, of course, they have trust funds.)", "there's been a whole debate on the topic. for a while, no play was sold to the theaters without a big fight between the children's playwright and the actors playing adult roles.", "are you kidding?", "oh, there's been a lot of quarreling.", "and the boys are winning so far?", "yes, they are, my lord little boys are carrying the whole theater on their backs, like hercules carried the world.", "actually, it's not so unusual when you think about it. my uncle is king of denmark, and the same people who made fun of him while my father was still alive are now rushing to pay twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for miniature portraits of him. there's something downright unnatural about it, if a philosopher stopped to think about it.", "the actors are here.", "gentlemen, welcome to elsinore. don't be shy shake hands with me. if i'm going to welcome you i have to go through all these polite customs, don't i? and if we don't shake hands, when i act all nice to the players it will seem like i'm happier to see them than you. you are very welcome here. but still, my uncle-father and aunt-mother have got the wrong idea."], ["in what sense, my lord?", "i'm only crazy sometimes. at other times, i know what's what.", "gentlemen, i hope you are well.", "listen, guildenstern, and you too, rosencrantz listen as close as you can! polonius this big baby is still in diapers.", "yes, the second time around, since, as they say, old people become children again.", "rosencrantz guildenstern i bet he's coming to tell me about the actors; just watch. ( polonius you're right, sir, that happened on monday morning.", "my lord, i have news for you.", "my lord, i have news for you. when roscius was an actor in ancient rome", "the actors have arrived, my lord.", "yawn, snore.", "i swear", "each actor arrived on his ass."], ["they are the best actors in the world, either for . the tragic playwright seneca is not too heavy for them to handle nor is the comic writer plautus too light. for formal plays or freer dramas, these are the best actors around.", "oh, , judge of ancient israel, what a treasure you had!", "what treasure did he have, my lord?", "well, , .", "still talking about my daughter, i see.", "aren't i right, jephthah, old man?", "if you're calling me jephthah, my lord, i do have a daughter i love more than anything, yes.", "", "what is logical, then, my lord?", "why,"], [", and then, you know, if you want to know more, you can refer to the popular song, because now i have to stop.", "welcome, welcome to all of you. oh, you, i'm glad to see you. welcome, my good friends. oh, it's you! you've grown a beard since i saw you last. are you going to put a beard on me too? well hello, my young lady friend. you've grown as much as the height of a pair of platform shoes at least! i hope your voice hasn't changed yet. all of you are most welcome here. we'll get right to business. first, a speech. come on, give us a little speech to whet our appetites. a passionate speech, please.", "which speech, my lord?", "i heard you recite a speech for me once that was never acted out, or if it was, it was performed only once, since the play was not popular like caviar for a slob who couldn't appreciate it. but the critics and i found it to be an excellent play, with well-ordered scenes that were clever but not fancy."], ["i remember one critic said there was no vulgar language to spice up the dialogue, and showing off on playwright's part. that critic called it an excellent play, containing things to reflect upon as well as sweet music to enjoy. i loved one speech in particular. it was when murder. if you happen to remember this scene, begin at line let me see, how does it go? no, that's wrong; it begins like this: , . , . , , . sir, take it from there.", "my god, that was well done, my lord, with the right accent and a good ear.", ", . ,"], [", , , . , . , , , . . , , .", "this speech is going on too long.", "we'll have the barber trim it later, along with your beard. please, continue, players. this old man only likes the dancing or the sex scenes; he sleeps through all the rest. go on, come to the part about hecuba.", "", "\"the muffled queen\"?"], ["that's good. \"the muffled queen\" is good.", ".", "look how flushed the actor is, with tears in his eyes. all right, that's enough, please.", "first player very fine. i'll have you perform the rest of it soon. polonius my lord, will you make sure the actors are made comfortable? make sure you're good to them, since what they say about us later will go down in history. it'd be better to have a bad epitaph on our graves than to have their ill will while we're alive.", "my lord, i will give them all they deserve.", "good heavens, man, give them more than that! if you pay everyone what they deserve, would anyone ever escape a whipping? treat them with honor and dignity. the less they deserve, the more your generosity is worth. lead them inside."], ["come, everyone.", "follow him, friends. we'll watch a whole play tomorrow. first player my friend, can you perform ?", "yes, my lord.", "then we'll see that tomorrow night. by the way, if i were to compose an extra speech of twelve to sixteen lines and stick it into the play, you could learn it by heart for tomorrow, right?", "yes, my lord.", "very well. follow that gentleman now, and be careful not to make fun of him.", "my good friends, i'll see you tomorrow. welcome to elsinore.", "yes, my lord.", "ah yes, good-bye to you both.", "now i'm alone. oh, what a mean low-life i am! it's awful that this actor could force his soul to feel made-up feelings in a work of make-believe. he grew pale, shed real tears, became overwhelmed, his voice breaking with feeling and his whole being, even, meeting the needs of his act and all for nothing. for hecuba!"], ["what is hecuba to him, or he to hecuba, that he would weep for her? just imagine what he would do if he had the cause for feeling that i do. he would drown the stage with his tears and burst the audience's ears with his terrible words, drive the guilty spectators crazy, terrify the innocent ones, confuse the ignorant ones, and astound absolutely everyone's eyes and ears. but what do i, a grim and uncourageous rascal, do? mope around like a dreamer, not even bothering with plans for revenge, and i can say nothing nothing at all on behalf of a king whose dear life was stolen. am i a coward? is there anyone out there who'll call me \"villain\" and slap me hard? pull off my beard? pinch my nose? call me the worst liar? by god, if someone would do that to me, i'd take it, because i'm a lily-livered man otherwise, i would've fattened up the local vultures with the intestines of that low-life king a long time ago. bloody, inhuman villain! remorseless, treacherous, sex-obsessed, unnatural villain! ah, revenge! what an ass i am. i'm so damn brave. my dear father's been murdered, and i've been urged to seek revenge by heaven and hell, and yet all i can do is stand around cursing like a whore in the streets. damn it! i need to get myself together here! hmm. i've heard that guilty people watching a play have been so affected by the artistry of the scene that they are driven to confess their crimes out loud."], ["murder has no tongue, but miraculously it still finds a way to speak. i'll have these actors perform something like my father's murder in front of my uncle. i'll watch my uncle. i'll probe his conscience and see if he flinches. if he becomes pale, i know what to do. the ghost i saw may be the devil, and the devil has the power to assume a pleasing disguise, and so he may be taking advantage of my weakness and sadness to bring about my damnation. i need better evidence than the ghost to work with. the play's the thing to uncover the conscience of the king."], ["and you can't put your heads together and figure out why he's acting so dazed and confused, ruining his peace and quiet with such dangerous displays of lunacy?", "he admits he feels confused, but refuses to say why.", "and he's not exactly eager to be interrogated. he's very sly and dances around our questions when we try to get him to talk about how he feels.", "did he treat you well when you saw him?", "yes, in a very gentlemanly way.", "but it seemed like he had to force himself to be nice to us.", "he didn't ask questions, but answered ours at length.", "did you try tempting him with some entertainment?", "madam, some actors happened to cross our paths on the way here. we told hamlet about them, and that seemed to do him good."], ["they are here at court now, and i believe they've been told to give a performance for him tonight.", "it's true, and he asked me to beg you both to attend.", "it makes me very happy to hear he's so interested. gentlemen, please try to sharpen his interest even more, and let this play do him some good.", "we will, my lord.", "dear gertrude, please give us a moment alone. we've secretly arranged for hamlet to come here so that he can run into ophelia. her father and i, justifiably acting as spies, will hide in the room and observe hamlet's behavior, to determine whether it's love that's making him suffer.", "yes, i'll go. as for you, ophelia, i hope that your beauty is the reason for hamlet's insane behavior, just as i hope your virtues will return him to normal some day, for the good of both of you.", "i hope so too, madam."], ["ophelia, come here. claudius your majesty, we will hide. ophelia read from this prayer book, so it looks natural that you're all alone. come to think of it, this happens all the time people act devoted to god to mask their bad deeds.", "how right he is! his words whip up my guilty feelings. the whore's pockmarked cheek made pretty with make-up is just like the ugly actions i'm disguising with fine words. what a terrible guilt i feel!", "i hear him coming. quick, let's hide, my lord.", "the question is: is it better to be alive or dead? is it nobler to put up with all the nasty things that luck throws your way, or to fight against all those troubles by simply putting an end to them once and for all? dying, sleeping that's all dying is a sleep that ends all the heartache and shocks that life on earth gives us that's an achievement to wish for. to die, to sleep to sleep, maybe to dream. ah, but there's the catch: in death's sleep who knows what kind of dreams might come, after we've put the noise and commotion of life behind us. that's certainly something to worry about. that's the consideration that makes us stretch out our sufferings so long."], ["after all, who would put up with all life's humiliations the abuse from superiors, the insults of arrogant men, the pangs of unrequited love, the inefficiency of the legal system, the rudeness of people in office, and the mistreatment good people have to take from bad when you could simply take out your knife and call it quits? who would choose to grunt and sweat through an exhausting life, unless they were afraid of something dreadful after death, the undiscovered country from which no visitor returns, which we wonder about without getting any answers from and which makes us stick to the evils we know rather than rush off to seek the ones we don't? fear of death makes us all cowards, and our natural boldness becomes weak with too much thinking. actions that should be carried out at once get misdirected, and stop being actions at all. but , here comes the beautiful ophelia. pretty lady, please remember me when you pray.", "hello, my lord, how have you been doing lately?", "very well, thank you. well, well, well.", "my lord, i have some mementos of yours that i've been meaning to give back to you for a long time now. please take them.", "no, it wasn't me. i never gave you anything.", "my lord, you know very well that you did, and wrote letters to go along with them, letters so sweetly written that they made your gifts even more valuable. their perfume is gone now, so take them back. nice gifts lose"], ["their value when the givers turn out not to be so nice. there, my lord.", "ha ha, are you good?", "excuse me?", "are you beautiful?", "my lord, what are you talking about?", "i'm just saying that if you're good and beautiful, your goodness should have nothing to do with your beauty.", "but could beauty be related to anything better than goodness?", "sure, since beauty's power can more easily change a good girl into a whore than the power of goodness can change a beautiful girl into a virgin. this used to be a great puzzle, but now i've solved it. i used to love you.", "you certainly made me believe you did, my lord.", "you shouldn't have believed me, since we're all rotten at the core, no matter how hard we try to be virtuous. i didn't love you.", "then i guess i was misled.", "get yourself to a at once. why would you want to give birth to more sinners? i'm fairly good myself, but even so i could accuse myself of such horrible crimes that it would've been better if my mother had never given birth to me. and"], ["i am arrogant, vengeful, ambitious, with more ill will in me than i can fit into my thoughts, and more than i have time to carry it out in. why should people like me be crawling around between earth and heaven? every one of us is a criminal. don't believe any of us. hurry to a convent. where's your father?", "he's at home, my lord.", "lock him in, so he can play the fool in his own home only. good-bye.", "oh, dear god, please help him!", "if you marry, i'll give you this curse as your wedding present be as clean as ice, as pure as the driven snow, and you'll still get a bad reputation. get yourself to a convent, at once. good-bye. or if you have to get married, marry a fool, since wise men know far too well that you'll cheat on them. good-bye.", "dear god, please make him normal again!", "i've heard all about you women and your cosmetics too. god gives you one face, but you paint another on top of it. you dance and prance and lisp; you call god's creations by pet names, and you excuse your sexpot ploys by pleading ignorance. come on, i won't stand for it anymore. it's driven me crazy. i hereby declare we will have no more marriage. whoever is already married (except one person i know) will stay married all but one person. everyone else will have to stay single. get yourself to a convent, fast."], ["oh, how noble his mind used to be, and how lost he is now! he used to have a gentleman's grace, a scholar's wit, and a soldier's strength. he used to be the jewel of our country, the obvious heir to the throne, the one everyone admired and imitated. and now he has fallen so low! and of all the miserable women who once enjoyed hearing his sweet, seductive words, i am the most miserable. a mind that used to sing so sweetly is now completely out of tune, making harsh sounds instead of fine notes. the unparalleled appearance and nobility he had in the full bloom of his youth has been ruined by madness. o, how miserable i am to see hamlet now and know what he was before!", "love? his feelings don't move in that direction. and his words, although they were a little disorganized, weren't crazy. no, his sadness is hatching something, like a hen does sitting on an egg. what hatches very well may be dangerous. so to prevent any harm being done, i've made a quick executive decision: he'll be sent to england to try to get back the money they owe us. with any luck, the sea and new countries will push out these thoughts that have somehow taken root in his mind. what do you think of this plan?", "it should work. but i still believe that his madness was caused by unrequited love. hello, ophelia. you don't have to tell us what lord hamlet said."], ["we heard everything. my lord, do whatever you like, but if you like this idea, let his mother the queen get him alone and beg him to share his feelings with her. i'll hide and listen in. if she can't find out what his secret is, then send him off to england or wherever you think best.", "that's how we'll do it, then. when important people start to show signs of insanity, you have to watch them closely."], ["perform the speech just as i taught you, musically and smoothly. if you exaggerate the words the way some actors do, i might as well have some newscaster read the lines. don't use too many hand gestures; just do a few, gently, like this. when you get into a whirlwind of passion on stage, remember to keep the emotion moderate and smooth. i hate it when i hear a blustery actor in a wig tear a passion to shreds, bursting everyone's eardrums so as to impress the audience on the lower levels of the playhouse, who for the most part can only appreciate loud noises and pantomime shows. i would whip a guy for making a tyrant sound too tyrannical. that's as bad as those old plays in which king herod ranted. please avoid doing that.", "i will, sir.", "but don't be too tame, either let your good sense guide you. fit the action to the word and the word to the action. act natural at all costs. exaggeration has no place in the theater, where the purpose is to represent reality, holding a mirror up to virtue, to vice, and to the spirit of the times. if you handle this badly, it just makes ignorant people laugh while regular theater-goers are miserable and they're the ones you should be keeping happy."], ["i've seen actors who are highly praised, but who not to be too rude here can't even talk or walk like human beings. they bellow and strut about like weird animals that were made to look like men, but very badly.", "i hope we've corrected that fault pretty well in our company, sir.", "oh, correct it completely. make sure that the clowns do not ad-lib, since some of them will make certain dumb audience members laugh mindlessly at them, while an important issue in the play needs to be addressed. it's bad behavior for an actor, anyway, and displays a pitiful ambition to hog the limelight on stage.", "so, my lord, will the king be attending the performance?", "yes, he will, and the queen as well.", "tell the actors to hurry.", "will you two help them get ready?", "yes, my lord.", "well, hello there, horatio!"], ["here i am at your service, my dear lord.", "horatio, you're the best man i've ever known.", "oh, sir", "don't think i'm flattering you. what could i hope to get from you, who've got nothing but your charm to support you in life? why would anyone flatter a poor person? no, keep flattery for kissing the hands of those who can pay well. you understand? ever since i've been a free agent in my choice of friends, i've chosen you because you take everything life hands you with calm acceptance, grateful for both good and bad. blessed are those who mix emotion with reason in just the right proportion, making them strong enough to resist the whims of lady luck. show me the person who's master of his emotions, and i'll put him close to my heart in my heart of hearts as i do you. but i'm talking too much. the point is, there's a play being performed for the king tonight. one of the scenes comes very close to depicting the circumstances of my father's death, as i described them to you. watch my uncle carefully when that scene begins. if his guilty secret does not reveal itself, then that ghost was just a devil, and my hunch wasn't, in fact, worth anything."], ["watch him closely. i'll stare at him too, and afterward we'll compare notes on him.", "my lord, i'll watch him as closely as i would a thief. i won't miss a trick.", "they're coming. i can't talk now. take your seat.", "so how's my nephew hamlet doing?", "wonderful! i eat the air, like chameleons do. i'm positively stuffed with air, i eat so much of it.", "i have no idea what you're talking about, hamlet. you're not answering my question.", "mine, neither. polonius my lord, you performed in amateur dramatic productions in college, right?", "indeed i did, my lord. i was considered to be quite a good actor.", "what role did you play?", "i played julius caesar. i was killed in the capitol. brutus killed me."], ["that was brutish of them, to kill so capital a guy. are the actors ready?", "yes, my lord. they're ready whenever you are.", "come here, my dear hamlet. sit by me.", "no thanks, my good mother. there's a nicer piece of work right here. ophelia", "claudius hey, did you notice that?", "my lady, should i lie in your lap?", "no, my lord.", "i mean, with my head in your lap?", "yes, my lord.", "did you think i was talking about sex?", "i think , my lord.", "that's a nice thought to lie between a girl's legs.", "what is, my lord?", "nothing.", "you're in a good mood tonight, my lord.", "who, me?", "yes, my lord."], ["oh god who is, by the way, the best comic of them all. what can you do but be happy? look how cheerful my mother is, only two hours after my father died.", "no, my lord, it's been four months.", "as long as that? well, in that case these mourning clothes can go to hell. i'll get myself a fur-trimmed suit. good heavens, he died two months ago and hasn't been forgotten yet? in that case, there's reason to hope a man's memory may outlive him by six months. but he's got to build churches for that to happen, my lady, or else he'll have to put up with being forgotten, like the hobby-horse in the popular song that goes, \"heigh-ho, heigh-ho, the hobby-horse is forgotten.\"", "", "what does this mean, my lord?", "this means we're having some mischievous fun."], ["this pantomime was probably a summary of the play.", "this guy will tell us everything. actors can't keep a secret. they'll tell all.", "will he tell us what that pantomime meant?", "sure, or anything else you show him. as long as you aren't ashamed to show it, he won't be ashamed to tell you what it means.", "you're naughty. i'm watching the play.", ".", "was that the prologue or the inscription on some wedding ring?", "it was a bit short, my lord.", "yes, as short as a woman's love."], [".", ".", "", ".", "harsh!"], [".", "."], [". .", "nice vow, but what if she breaks it?", ".", ".", "madam, how are you liking this play?", "the lady's overdoing it, i think.", "oh, but she'll keep her word.", "do you know the plot? is there anything offensive in it?", "no, no, it's just a joke, a little jibe but all in good fun. not offensive at all.", "what's the play called?"], [". why on earth is it called that, you ask? it's a metaphor. this play is about a murder committed in vienna. gonzago is the duke's name, and his wife is baptista. you'll see soon enough. it's a piece of garbage, but who cares? you and i have free souls, so it doesn't concern us. let the guilty wince. we can watch without being bothered.", "this is lucianus, the king's nephew in the play.", "you're an expert commentator, aren't you?", "yes. i could even supply the dialogue between you and your lover if you did your little puppet show of love for me.", "ooh, you're sharp.", "yes, pointy, but you could take the edge off me though it might make you moan a little.", "you get better in your jokes and worse in your manners.", "that's what you women get when you trick us into marriage. let's get started, murderer on stage, please! damn it, stop fussing with the makeup, and get going. we're all waiting for the revenge!", "player king"], ["you see, he poisons the king in his own garden to get the kingdom for himself. the king's name is gonzago. the original story was written in the finest italian. you'll see shortly how the murderer wins the love of gonzago's wife.", "the king is getting up.", "what is he scared of a gun that only fired a blank?", "my lord, how are you feeling?", "stop the play.", "turn on the lights. get me out of here!", "lights, lights, get us some lights!", ", . , . couldn't i get work as an actor (if i hit a run of bad luck) in some acting company, and wear flowers on my shoes?", "they might even give you half a share of the company.", "no, a whole share for me. , ."], ["you could have at least .", "oh, horatio, i'll bet you a thousand bucks the ghost was right. did you notice?", "yes, i did, my lord.", "when the actors were talking about poison?", "i watched him very closely.", "ah ha! hey, let's have some music here! play your flutes! , . come on, music!", "my lord, could i have a word with you?", "you can have a whole story, not just a word.", "sir, the king", "yes, what about him?", "he's in his chambers now, and he's extremely upset."], ["what, an upset stomach from too much booze?", "no, sir, he's angry.", "you should be smart enough to tell this to a doctor, not me, since if i treated him, he'd just get angrier.", "my lord, please try to stick to the subject at hand.", "i'll be good, sir. go ahead.", "the queen your mother is upset, and sent me to see you.", "it's lovely to see you.", "no, my lord, your polite words are not to the point. if you could please stop fooling around, i'll tell you what your mother wants. if not, i'll leave you alone and that'll be the end of my business.", "sir, i can't.", "can't what, my lord?", "stop fooling around. my mind is confused. but i'll do my best to give you a straight answer, as you wish or rather, as my mother wishes. okay, to the point. my mother, you say ?", "she says that your behavior has astonished her."], ["oh, what a wonderful son, i can impress my mother! but what's the upshot of her admiration? do tell.", "she wants to have a word with you in her bedroom before you go to bed.", "i'd obey even if she were my mother ten times over. is there anything else i can do for you?", "my lord, you used to like me.", "and still do, i swear by my hands.", "my lord, what's wrong with you? you're not doing yourself any good by refusing to tell your friends what's bothering you.", "sir, i have no future ahead of me.", "but how can you say that, when the king himself says you're the heir to the danish throne?", "yes, eventually, but as the proverb goes, but that's a tired old proverb. oh, the recorders! let me see one. guildenstern why are you hovering so close, as if you want to ambush me?", "oh, my lord, i'm sorry if i'm forgetting my manners. it's just that i'm worried about you."], ["i don't really understand what you mean. will you play this recorder?", "i can't, my lord.", "please.", "i'm serious, i can't.", "i'm begging you.", "i have no idea how.", "oh, it's as easy as lying. just put your fingers and thumb over the holes and blow into it, and it'll produce the most moving music. here, the holes are here.", "but i can't play a melody. i don't know how.", "well, look how you play me as if you knew exactly where to put your fingers, to blow the mystery out of me, playing all the octaves of my range and yet you can't even produce music from this little instrument? my god, do you think i'm easier to manipulate than a pipe? you can push my buttons, but you can't play me for a fool."], ["hello and god bless you, sir.", "my lord, the queen wants to speak with you right away.", "do you see that cloud up there that looks like a camel?", "by god, it does look like a camel.", "to me it looks like a weasel.", "it does have a back like a weasel's.", "or like a whale.", "yes, very much like a whale.", "i'll go see my mother soon. they're trying as hard as they can to mess with me. i will go soon.", "i'll tell her.", "it's easy enough to say \"soon.\"", "now please leave me alone, my friends.", "this is the time of night when witches come out, when graveyards yawn open and the stench of hell seeps out. i could drink hot blood and do such terrible deeds that people would tremble even in the daylight. but i've got to go see my mother. oh, heart, don't grow weak, like let me be cruel, but not inhuman."], ["i'll speak as sharp as a dagger to her, but i won't use one on her. and so, my words and thoughts will be at odds."], ["i don't like the way he's acting, and it's not safe for me to let his insanity get out of control. so get prepared. i'm sending you to england on diplomatic business, and hamlet will go with you. as king, i cannot risk the danger he represents as he grows crazier by the hour.", "we'll take care of it. it's a sacred duty to protect the lives of all those who depend on your highness.", "everyone tries to avoid harm, but the public figure demands even more protection. when a great leader dies he doesn't die alone but, like a whirlpool, draws others with him. he's like a huge wheel on the top of the highest mountain whose spokes touch the rim of ten thousand smaller things when it falls down the mountain, every little object goes down with it. whenever a king sighs, everyone groans.", "prepare yourself, please, for this trip. we'll put a leash on this danger that's now running wild."], ["we'll hurry.", "my lord, hamlet's going to his mother's room. i'll hide behind the tapestry to hear what they say. i bet she'll chew him out. and as you said (and you said it wisely), it's good to have someone other than a mother listening in on them, since she can be too partial to him. goodbye, my lord. i'll stop by before you go to bed, and tell you what i've heard.", "thanks, my dear lord.", "oh, my crime is so rotten it stinks all the way to heaven. it has the mark of on it, a brother's murder. i can't pray, though i want to desperately. my guilt is stronger even than my intentions. and like a person with two opposite things to do at once, i stand paralyzed and neglect them both. so what if this cursed hand of mine is coated with my brother's blood? isn't there enough rain in heaven to wash it clean as snow? isn't that what god's mercy is for? and doesn't prayer serve these two purposes to keep us from sinning and to bring us forgiveness when we have sinned? so i'll pray. i've already committed my sin. but, oh, what kind of prayer is there for me? \"dear lord, forgive me for my horrible murder\"?"], ["that won't work, since i'm still reaping the rewards of that murder: my crown and my queen. can a person be forgiven and still keep the fruits of his crime? in this wicked world, criminals often take the money they stole and use it to buy off the law, shoving justice aside. but not in heaven. up there, every action is judged for exactly what it's worth, and we're forced to confront our crimes. so what can i do? what is there left to do? offer whatever repentance i can that couldn't hurt. but it can't help either! oh, what a lousy situation i'm in. my heart's as black as death. my soul is stuck to sin, and the more it struggles to break free, the more it sticks. help me, angels! c'mon, make an effort. bend, stubborn knees. steely heart, be soft as a newborn babe, so i can pray. perhaps everything will turn out okay after all. (", "i could do it easily now. he's praying now. and now i'll do it. and there he goes, off to heaven. and that's my revenge. i'd better think about this more carefully. a villain kills my father, and i, my father's only son, send this same villain to heaven. seems like i just did him a favor. he killed my father when my father was enjoying life, with all his sins in full bloom, before my father could repent for any of them. only god knows how many sins my father has to pay for. as for me, i don't think his prospects look so good."], ["so is it really revenge for me if i kill claudius right when he is confessing his sins, in perfect condition for a trip to heaven? no. away, sword, and wait for a better moment to kill him. when he's sleeping off some drunken orgy, or having incestuous sex, or swearing while he gambles, or committing some other act that has no goodness about it that's when i'll trip him up and send him to hell with his heels kicking up at heaven. my mother's waiting. the king's trying to cure himself with prayer, but all he's doing is keeping himself alive a little longer.", "my words fly up toward heaven, but my thoughts stay down here on earth. words without thoughts behind them will never make it to heaven."], ["he'll come right away. make sure you lay into him. tell him his pranks have caused too much trouble, and that your highness has taken a lot of heat for them. i'll be right here, silent. please be blunt with him.", "mother, mother, mother!", "don't worry, i'll do what you say. now hide, i hear him coming.", "now mother, what's this all about?", "hamlet, you've insulted your father.", "mother, you've insulted my father.", "come on, you're answering me foolishly.", "go on, you're questioning me evilly.", "hamlet, what, why?", "what's the problem now?", "have you forgotten who i am?", "for god's sake no, i haven't. you are the queen, your husband's brother's wife, and you are my mother, though i wish you weren't."], ["in that case i'll call in others who can still speak.", "no, sit down. you won't budge until i hold a mirror up to you, where you will see what's deep inside you.", "what are you going to do? you won't kill me, will you? help!", "hey! help, help, help!", "what's this, a rat? i'll bet a buck he's a dead rat now.", "oh, i've been killed!", "oh my god, what have you done?", "i don't know. is it the king?", "oh, what a senseless, horrible act!", "a horrible act almost as bad, my good mother, as killing a king and marrying his brother.", "killing a king?", "that's what i said, my good woman."], ["you low-life, nosy, busybody fool, goodbye. i thought you were somebody more important. you've gotten what you deserve. i guess you found out it's dangerous to be a busybody. gertrude stop wringing your hands. sit down and let me wring your heart instead, which i will do if it's still soft enough, if your evil lifestyle has not toughened it against feeling anything at all.", "what have i done that you dare to talk to me so rudely?", "a deed that destroys modesty, turns virtue into hypocrisy, replaces the blossom on the face of true love with a nasty blemish, makes marriage vows as false as a gambler's oath oh, you've done a deed that plucks the soul out of marriage and turns religion into meaningless blather. heaven looks down on this earth, as angry as if judgment day were here, and is sick at the thought of what you've done.", "c'mon, what's this deed that sounds so awful even before i know what it is?", "look at this picture here, and that one there, . look how kind and gentlemanly this one is, with his curly hair and his forehead like a greek god. his eye could command like the god of war. his body is as agile as mercury just landing on a high hill. a figure and a combination of good qualities that seemed like every god had set his stamp on this man."], ["that was your husband. now look at this other one. here is your present husband, like a mildewed ear of corn infecting the healthy one next to it. do you have eyes? how could you leave the lofty heights of this man here and descend as low as this one? ha! do you have eyes? you cannot say you did it out of love, since at your age romantic passions have grown weak, and the heart obeys reason. but what reason could move you from this one to that one? you must have some sense in your head, since you're able to get around, but it seems to be paralyzed, since even if you were crazy you would know the difference between these two men. no one ever went so insane that they couldn't get an easy choice like this one right. what devil was it that blindfolded you? eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, ears without hands or eyes, smell without anything else, the use of even one impaired sense would not permit such a mistake as yours. oh, for shame, why aren't you blushing? if evil can overtake even an old mother's bones, then let it melt my own. it turns out it's no longer shameful to act on impulse now that the old are doing so, and now that reason is a servant to desire.", "oh, hamlet, stop! you're making me look into my very soul, where the marks of sin are so thick and black they will never be washed away.", "yes, and you lie in the sweaty stench of your dirty sheets, wet with corruption, making love"], ["oh, you must stop! your words are like daggers. please, no more, sweet hamlet.", "a murderer and a villain, a low-life who's not worth a twentieth of a tenth of your first husband the worst of kings, a thief of the throne, who took the precious crown from a shelf and put it in his pocket", "stop!", "a ragtag king", "oh, angels in heaven, protect me with your wings! what can i do for you, my gracious lord?", "oh no! hamlet's gone completely crazy.", "have you come to scold your tardy son for straying from his mission, letting your important command slip by? tell me!", "don't forget. i've come to sharpen your somewhat dull appetite for revenge. but look, your mother is in shock. oh, keep her struggling soul from being overwhelmed by horrid visions. the imagination works strongest in those with the weakest bodies. talk to her, hamlet."], ["how are you doing, madam?", "and how are doing, staring into the empty air and talking to nobody? your eyes give away your wild thoughts, and your hair is standing upright, like soldiers during a call to arms. oh my dear son, calm yourself and cool off your overheated mind! what are you staring at?", "at him, at him! look how pale he is and how he glares at me. preaching even at stones, he could get them to act. ghost don't look at me like that, unless you want me to cry instead of kill.", "who are you talking to?", "you don't see anything?", "nothing at all, but i can see everything that's here.", "and you don't hear anything?", "no, nothing but us talking.", "look, look how it's sneaking away! my father, dressed just like he was when he was alive! look, he's going out the door right now!"], ["this is only a figment of your imagination. madness is good at creating hallucinations.", "madness? my heart beats just as evenly as yours does. there's nothing crazy in what i've just uttered. put me to the test. i'll rephrase everything i've just said, which a lunatic couldn't do. mother, for the love of god, don't flatter yourself into believing that it's my madness, not your crime, that's the problem. you'd just be concealing the rot that's eating you from the inside. confess your sins to heaven. repent and avoid damnation. don't spread manure over the weeds in your heart; it'll only make them more filthy. forgive me my good intentions here since in these fat and spoiled times, virtuous people have to say, \"beg your pardon\" to vile ones and beg for the chance to do any good.", "oh hamlet, you've broken my heart in two!", "then throw away the worse half, and live a purer life with the other! good night to you. but don't go to my uncle's bed tonight. at least pretend to be virtuous, even if you're not. habit is a terrible thing, in that it's easy to get used to doing evil without feeling bad about it. but it's also a good thing, in that being good can also become a habit. say no to sex tonight, and that will make it easier to say no the next time, and still easier the time after that. habit can change even one's natural instincts, and either rein in the devil in us, or kick him out. once again, good night to you, and when you want to repent, i'll ask you for your blessing too. i'm sorry about what happened to this gentleman polonius , but"], ["god wanted to punish me with this murder, and this man with me, so i'm both heaven's executioner and its minister of justice. this is bad, but it'll get worse soon. oh, and one other thing, madam.", "what should i do?", "whatever you do, don't do this: let the fat king seduce you into his bed again, so he can pinch your cheek, call you his bunny, and with filthy kisses and a massage of your neck with his damned fingers, make you admit that my madness is fake, all calculated. what a great idea that would be, because why would a fair, sober, wise queen hide such things from a toad, a pig, a monster like him? who would do that? no, no, it's better to spill the beans right away, let the cat out of the bag, and break your neck in the process.", "you can rest easy, since words are made of breath, and breathing requires that you be alive. i feel too dead to breathe a word of what you've told me."], ["i have to go to england, don't you know that?", "ah, i'd forgotten all about that! it's been decided.", "yes, it's a done deal, the documents are ready, and my two schoolmates, whom i trust about as much as rattlesnakes, are in charge. they're the ones who'll lead me on my march to mischief. let it happen. it's fun to watch the engineer get blown up by his own explosives, and with any luck i'll dig a few feet below their bombs and blow them to the moon. oh, it's nice to kill two birds with one stone. ( polonius now that i've killed this guy, i'll be off in a hurry. i'll lug his guts into the next room. mother, have a good night. this politician who was in life a babbling idiot is now quiet and serious. come on, sir, let's get to the end of our business. good night, mother."], ["gertrude these deep, heaving sighs of yours mean something. you have to tell me what. i need to know. where's your son?", "rosencrantz guildenstern let us speak privately awhile, please.", "ah, my lord, you wouldn't believe what i've witnessed tonight!", "what, gertrude? how is hamlet?", "as mad as the waves and the wind when they struggle together in a storm. in an insane rage, he hears something behind the tapestry, whips out his sword, shouts, \"a rat, a rat!\" and in his deranged state of mind he kills the good old man, who is still hidden.", "oh, this is terrible! it would've happened to me if i'd been there. his wildness is a threat to all of us to you, to me, to everyone. how will we deal with this violent deed? i'm the one who will be blamed for not restraining and confining this mad young man. but i loved him so much i didn't want to think about what i had to do. so, like someone suffering from a nasty disease who refuses to divulge his condition and lets it infect him to"], ["the core, i kept hamlet's condition secret and let it grow more and more dangerous. where has he gone?", "to remove the corpse of the man he killed. his madness allows a glimmering of morality to shine through, like a vein of gold in a chunk of coal. he weeps for what he has done.", "oh, gertrude, let's go. as soon as the sun sets we'll ship him off to england. it'll take all my diplomatic know-how to explain and excuse the murder he's committed. hey, guildenstern!", "my friends, go find others to help you. hamlet in his madness has killed polonius and dragged him out of his mother's bedroom. go find him and speak nicely to him, and bring the corpse into the chapel. please hurry.", "come, gertrude. we'll confer with our wisest friends and tell them what we're going to do, and what terrible deed has been done already. let's hope slander a bullet that can travel halfway around the world and still hit its exact target spares us. oh, we must go. i'm full of confusion and despair."], ["the body is safely hidden.", "hamlet, lord hamlet!", "what's that noise? who's calling for hamlet? oh, here they come.", "what have you done with the corpse, my lord?", "i've gotten it dirty ashes to ashes, and dust to dust.", "but tell us where it is, so we can take it to the chapel.", "don't believe it.", "believe what?", "that i'd take your advice rather than keep my own secret. besides, you're a sponge! what is the son of a king supposed to say to a sponge?", "you think i'm a sponge, my lord?"], ["yes, sir, a sponge that soaks up the king's approval, his rewards, and his decisions. officers like that give the king the best service in the end. he keeps them in his mouth like an ape. first he moves them around, then he swallows them. when he needs what you have found out, he can just squeeze you like a sponge and you'll be dry again.", "i don't follow, my lord.", "i'm glad about that. sly words are never understood by fools.", "my lord, you have to tell us where the body is, and then go with us to see the king.", "the body's with the king, but the king's not with the body. the king's a thing", "a \"thing,\" my lord?", "a thing of no importance. take me to him. ready or not, here i come!"], ["i've sent men to find him and retrieve the body. how dangerous to have this madman on the loose! but we can't throw him in jail. the people love him, because they judge based on appearance rather than reason. they'll pay attention to the severity of the punishment, not the severity of the crime. no, we must seem calm and fair-minded, and our sending him away must seem like a carefully considered move. but a terminal disease requires extreme treatment, or nothing at all.", "so what's happened?", "we can't get him to tell us where he's put the body.", "but where is he?", "outside, my lord, under guard, waiting for your orders.", "bring him to me.", "hey, guildenstern! bring in my lord.", "now, hamlet, where's polonius?"], ["at dinner.", "at dinner where?", "not where he's eating, but where he's being eaten. a certain is chowing down on him. worms are the emperor of all diets. we fatten up all creatures to feed ourselves, and we fatten ourselves for the worms to eat when we're dead. a fat king and a skinny beggar are just two dishes at the same meal. that's all i have to say.", "oh no, oh no!", "a man can fish with the worm that ate a king, and then eat the fish he catches with that worm.", "what do you mean by that?", "nothing much, just to demonstrate that a king can move through the bowels of a beggar.", "where is polonius?", "in heaven. send a messager there if you want to be sure. if your messenger can't find him, you can check hell yourself. but seriously, if you don't find him within the next month, you'll be sure to smell him as you go upstairs into the main hall.", "go look for him there.", "no need to hurry, he's not going anywhere."], ["hamlet, i care for you just as much as i grieve for polonius. for your own protection, i must send you to england at once. so get ready to leave. the ship is set to sail, the wind is favorable, your servants are waiting for you everything is ready for you to go to england.", "to england?", "yes, hamlet.", "good.", "yes, you'd think so, if you knew why i was sending you.", "i know an angel who can read your mind. but okay, off to england! good-bye, dear mother.", "i'm your father, hamlet your father who loves you.", "you're my mother. when you married my mother, the two of you became one flesh, so if you're my father you're also my mother. come on, off to england!", "follow him on foot, and get him on board as quickly as possible. don't waste any time. i want him out of here tonight. go now; everything else is ready. please hurry.", "and you, dear king of england, if you care about me at all and you should, since you can still feel the damage that denmark has done to you in the past and, so, fear and respect us then you won't ignore my letters instructing you to kill hamlet immediately. do it,"], ["english king, since he's raging like a fever in my brain, and you must cure me. until i know it's been done, i'll never be happy, no matter how much luck i have."], ["go, captain, and give the danish king my greetings. tell him that fortinbras asks permission to move his troops across denmark. you know the meeting place we've arranged. if his majesty wants us to do any favor for him, tell him his wish is my command.", "i'll tell him, my lord.", "go ahead, then.", "sir, whose troops are these?", "the king of norway's, sir.", "what are they doing here, sir?", "they're on their way to invade some part of poland.", "who's commanding them, sir?", "the nephew of the old king of norway, fortinbras.", "is he attacking the heartland of poland or some frontier?"], ["to tell the truth, we're fighting to win a little patch of ground that's not worth anything. i myself wouldn't pay five ducats for it, if someone offered it to me to farm. and it won't provide any more profits than that to either the norwegian or the pole.", "so then the poles won't be willing to defend it.", "oh, yes they will. they've already stationed troops there.", "( ) even two thousand men and twenty-thousand ducats are just the beginning of what it will cost to settle this pointless matter. this is what happens when countries have too much money and peace. this quarrel is like an abcess that grows inside someone until it bursts and kills them, and no one knows why. ( captain) thank you very much for the information, sir.", "good-bye, sir.", "will you please come now, my lord?", "i'll be there in a minute. start without me.", "my god! everything i see shows me how wrong i am and tells me to hurry up and get on with my revenge. what is a human being if he just eats and sleeps? nothing more than a beast. god didn't create us with such a huge power of thought and a divine capacity for reason in order for us not to use them. now, whether it's animal-like mindlessness, or the cowardly hesitation"], ["that comes from thinking too much (thinking thoughts that are one part wisdom, three parts cowardice), i don't know why i'm still alive to say \"i have to do this deed\" rather than having done it already. i have the motivation, the willpower, the ability, and the means to do it. it's as plain as the ground beneath my feet that i must do it. look at this massive army led by a delicate and tender prince who's so puffed up with divine ambition that he puts his fragile life at risk, exposing it to danger and death, for a reason as thin as an eggshell. to be truly great doesn't mean you'd only fight for a good reason. it means you'd fight over nothing if your honor was at stake. so where does that leave me, whose father has been murdered and mother defiled, ignoring these mental and emotional provocations and letting well enough alone? meanwhile, to my shame, i watch twenty thousand men go marching to their deaths for an illusion and a little bit of fame, fighting for a tiny piece of land not even big enough to bury them all. from now on, if my thoughts aren't violent i'll consider them worthless."], ["i won't speak to her.", "she's insistent. in fact, she's crazed. you can't help feeling sorry for her.", "what does she want?", "she talks about her father a lot, and says she hears there are conspiracies around the world, and coughs, and beats her breast, and gets angry over tiny matters, and talks nonsense. her words don't mean anything, but her babbling causes her listeners to draw conclusions. they hear what they want to hear. her winks and nods and gestures do suggest that she means to convey a message, and not a happy one.", "it's a good idea to speak to her, since she might lead those with evil intentions to dangerous conclusions.", "show her in.", "to my sick soul (since sin is always a sickness), every detail looks like an omen of disaster to come. guilt makes you so full of stupid suspicions that you give yourself away because you're trying so hard not to."], ["where is the beautiful queen of denmark?", "what are you doing, ophelia?", ".", "oh heavens, what does that song mean, my dear?", "i'm sorry, did you say something? please just listen. , . , . oh, ho!", "no, ophelia", "just listen, please.", "my lord, look at this poor girl.", "."], ["how are you doing, my pretty lady?", "i'm quite well, and may god give you what you deserve. they say the baker's daughter was turned into an owl for refusing jesus' bread. my lord, we know what we are now, but not what we may become. may god be at your table.", "she's talking about her dead father.", "oh, let's not talk about that, but when they ask you what it means, just say: . . .", "pretty ophelia", "hang on, i'll end it soon, i promise: , , . , ,"], ["how long has she been like this?", "i hope everything will turn out fine. we must be patient, but i can't help crying when i think of him being laid in the cold ground. my brother will hear about this. and so i thank you for your good advice. come, driver! good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good night.", "follow her. keep an eye on her, please.", "oh, her grief has poisoned her mind. her father died and now look at her! oh, gertrude, gertrude, when bad things happen, they don't come one at a time, like enemy spies, but all at once like an army. first her father was killed, then your son was taken away because of his own violent actions. the people are confused and spreading nasty rumors about polonius's death, and i was a fool to bury him in a hurry, without a proper state funeral. poor ophelia has been robbed of her sanity, without which we're just pictures, or animals. last but not least, her brother has secretly returned from france and is surrounded by gossip-mongers, who fill his ears with wicked stories about his father's death. deprived of proper evidence, he'll naturally attribute the murder to me. oh, dear gertrude, i feel as though i'm being murdered many times over."], ["oh, no what's that noise?", "listen! where are my bodyguards? let them guard the door.", "what is it?", "you must save yourself, my lord. the young laertes, like the ocean when it floods the shore and devours the lowlands, is leading a rebellion against your government. the crowd calls him \"lord\" and shouts, \"we want laertes to be king!\" it's as if they were starting the world from scratch right now, throwing out the traditions and ancient customs that are the support of every word we utter. they throw their caps in the air and yell, \"laertes will be king! laertes king!\"", "they sound so cheerful as they hunt down the wrong prey! oh, you're on the wrong track, you disloyal danish dogs!", "the doors have been smashed open."], ["where's this so-called king? men, wait outside.", "no, let us in!", "please wait.", "all right, we will, we will.", "thank you. guard the door. ( claudius) oh, you vile king, give me my father!", "calm down, good laertes.", "i've got exactly one calm drop of blood in my body, and it proclaims that , says my father was betrayed, and stamps the label \"whore\" on the pure forehead of my devoted mother.", "laertes, what makes you so rebellious? let him go, gertrude. don't worry about my getting hurt. god protects the king, so traitors can't hurt him. tell me, laertes, why you're so angry. gertrude, let him go. tell me, man.", "where's my father?", "he's dead.", "but the king didn't kill him.", "let him ask what he wants to ask."], ["how did he end up dead? don't mess with me. to hell with my vows of allegiance to you! vows can go to hell! conscience, too! i don't care if i'm damned. i don't care what happens to me in this world or the next. whatever happens, happens, but i'll get revenge for my father's murder.", "who's stopping you?", "only my free will nothing else. what little means i have, i'll use against you.", "my dear laertes, in your eagerness to know the truth about your father's death, are you determined to hurt your father's friends and enemies alike?", "no, only his enemies.", "do you want to know who they are, then?", "i'll open my arms wide to his true friends, and like a mother with her brood, i'll even give my life for them.", "why, now you're talking like a good son and a true gentleman. i'll prove to you as clearly as daylight that i'm innocent of your father's death, and am struck with grief over it."], ["what's that noise?", "oh, heat, dry up my brains! salty tears, burn my eyes! by heaven, i'll get revenge for your madness! oh, you springtime rose, dear maiden, kind sister, sweet ophelia! is it possible that a young woman's mind could fade away as easily as an old man's life? human nature is refined and thoughtful person graciously gives a valuable part of herself away to her beloved, as ophelia has sent off her sanity to her dead father.", ", . . good-bye, honey.", "if you were sane and could urge me to take revenge, you couldn't be more persuasive than you are now.", "you're supposed to sing, \"a down a-down,\" and you, \"call him a-down-a.\" oh, how it turns around like a wheel! like the worker who stole his boss's daughter.", "this nonsense means more than rational speech.", "look at my flowers. there's rosemary, that's for remembering. please remember, love. and there are pansies, they're for thoughts."], ["a case study in madness, to connect memory and thought.", "gertrude here are fennel and columbines for you they symbolize adultery. claudius and here's rue for you it symbolizes repentance. we can call it the merciful sunday flower. you should wear it for a different reason. and here's a daisy, for unhappy love. i'd give you some violets, flowers of faithfulness, but they all dried up when my father died. they say he looked good when he died. .", "sadness and torment, suffering, hell itself she makes them almost pretty.", ". . . . , . . and on the souls of all good christians, i hope. goodbye, god be with you.", "do you see this, oh, god?", "laertes, i have a right to share your grief. go choose your wisest friends, and have them listen to both of us and decide which of us is right. if directly or indirectly they find me implicated in your father's murder, i'll give up my kingdom, my crown, my life, and everything i call my own to you as restitution. but if they find me innocent, then be patient and i'll work to satisfy to the fullest extent your deepest need for revenge."], ["all right, then. the way he died, his secret funeral, no funeral rites or military display, no noble rites or formal ceremony shout out from heaven and earth that i must call the way he died into question.", "and you're right to do so. may the guilty party be punished by death. please, come with me."], ["who are the people who want to speak with me?", "sailors, sir. they say they have letters for you.", "show them in.", "i don't know who else would send me a letter from abroad except hamlet.", "hello, sir. god bless you.", "may he bless you, too.", "he will, sir, if he wants to. there's a letter for you, sir. it's from the ambassador, lord hamlet, who was going to england if your name's horatio, as they told me it is. horatio", "\"horatio, when you've read this letter, find a way to let these guys see the king. they have letters for him. before we were at sea for even two days, a pirate ship equipped for battle pursued us. we were too slow to escape, so we were forced to stand and fight. in the battle that followed i ended up on the pirate ship. just then they left our ship behind, so i became the only prisoner on board. they've treated me quite mercifully for thieves, but they knew what they were doing. they want me to do a favor for them."], ["give the king the letters i've sent, and come to me as fast as you would run from death. i've got things to tell you that will make you speechless, and they aren't even half the story. these guys will take you to me. rosencrantz and guildenstern are on their way to england. i have a lot to tell you about them. good-bye. your trusted friend, hamlet.\" come, men. i'll show you where to deliver these letters as quickly as possible, so that you can take me to the man who sent them."], ["now you've got to acknowledge my innocence and believe i'm your friend, since you've heard and understood that the man who killed your father was trying to kill me.", "it looks that way. but tell me why you didn't take immediate action against his criminal acts, when your own safety and everything else would seem to call for it.", "oh, for two main reasons which may seem weak to you, but strong to me. the queen, his mother, is devoted to him. and (for better or worse, whichever it is) she is such a part of my life and soul that i can't live apart from her, any more than a planet can leave its orbit. the other reason why i couldn't prosecute and arrest hamlet is that the public loves him. in their affection they overlook all his faults. like magic, they convert them into virtues, so whatever i said against him would end up hurting me, not him."], ["and so i've lost my noble father, had my sister driven insane my sister who once was (if i can praise her for what she once was, not what she is now) the most perfect girl who ever lived. but i'll get my revenge.", "don't you worry about that. you must not think that i'm so lazy and dull that i can be severely threatened and think it's just a game. you'll hear more about my plans soon enough. i loved your father, and i love myself, which should be enough to", "what is it? what's the news?", "letters, my lord, from hamlet. this one's for your highness, this one for the queen. claudius", "from hamlet? who delivered them?", "sailors, my lord, or so they say. i didn't see them. claudio gave them to me, and he got them from the one who delivered them.", "laertes, i want you to hear what they say. leave us alone now.", "\"high and mighty one, you know i've been set down naked, you might say, in your kingdom. tomorrow i'll beg permission to look into your kingly eyes, at which point i'll tell you the story (after first apologizing) of how i came back to denmark so strangely and suddenly. hamlet\""], ["what does this mean? has everyone else come back too? or is it all a lie and no one has yet returned?", "do you recognize the handwriting?", "it's hamlet's writing. \"naked,\" he says. and in a p.s. he adds, \"alone.\" can you help me out with this?", "i have no clue, my lord. but let him come. it warms my weary heart to think i'll get the chance to look him in the eye and say, \"you did this.\"", "if that's how you feel, laertes and why shouldn't you? will you let me guide and direct you?", "yes, my lord, as long as you won't lead me toward peace.", "no, just toward your own peace of mind. if he's come back to denmark without plans to continue on his trip, then i'll trick him into an undertaking, which i'm working out now, that's sure to kill him. when he dies, no one will be blamed, even his mother will call it an accident.", "my lord, i'll let you make the decision. i only ask to be in on your plans, the agent of his death."], ["that'll be fine. since you left, people have been talking about and within earshot of hamlet a certain quality of yours in which, they say, you shine. all your talents and gifts didn't arouse as much envy from him as this one quality did, though to me it's far from your best attribute.", "what quality is that, my lord?", "a trivial little ribbon on the cap of youth yet an important one, too, since casual clothes suit young people as much as serious business suits and overcoats suit the middle-aged. two months ago i met a gentleman from normandy. i've fought against the french and have seen how well they ride, but this man was a magician on horseback. it was as if he were part of the horse, so skillful that even having seen him, i can hardly conceive of the tricks he did.", "hmm, he was from normandy, you say?", "yes, from normandy.", "i bet it was lamond.", "yes, that's the one.", "i know him well. he's his homeland's jewel."], ["he mentioned you to me, giving you such high marks in fencing that he exclaimed it would be a miracle if someone could match you. french fencers wouldn't be good enough for you, he said, since they don't have the right moves or skills. hamlet was so jealous when he heard lamond's report that he talked about nothing else but having you come over and play against him. now, the point is", "what's the point, my lord?", "laertes, did you love your father? or is your grief just an illusion a mere painting of sorrow?", "how could you ask?", "not that i suspect you didn't love your father, but i've seen it happen that, as the days go by, time dampens the flame of love. the fire of love always burns itself out, and nothing stays the way it began. even a good thing can grow too big and die from its own excess. we should do what we intend to do right when we intend it, since our intentions are subject to as many weakenings and delays as there are words in the dictionary and accidents in life. and then all our \"woulds\" and \"shoulds\" are nothing but hot air. but back to my point: hamlet's coming back. what proof will you offer in action, not just words that you're your father's son?"], ["i'll cut hamlet's throat in church.", "it's true, no place not even a church should offer refuge to that murderer. revenge should have no limits. but laertes, will you do this: stay in your room? when hamlet comes home he'll learn you're here. i'll have people praise your excellence and put a double coat on the fame the frenchman gave you. in short, we'll get you together and place bets on you. hamlet's so careless, high-minded, and unsuspecting that he won't examine the swords beforehand, so you can easily choose one with a sharpened point and in one thrust avenge the death of your father.", "i'll do it, and i'll put a little dab of something on my sword as well. from a quack doctor i bought some oil so poisonous that if you dip a knife in it, no medicine in the world can save the person who's scratched by it. if i even graze his skin slightly, he's likely to die.", "let's think about this, and consider what time and what method will be most appropriate. if our plan were to fail, and people found out about it, it would be better never to have tried it. we should have a backup ready in case the first plan doesn't work. let me think. we'll place bets on you and hamlet that's it! when the two of you have gotten all sweaty and hot keep him jumping around a lot for that purpose hamlet will ask for something to drink. i'll have a cup ready for him. if by chance he"], ["escapes your poisoned sword tip, the drink will kill him. but wait, what's that sound?", "the bad news just keeps on coming, one disaster after another. your sister's drowned, laertes.", "drowned? oh, where?", "there's a willow that leans over the brook, dangling its white leaves over the glassy water. ophelia made wild wreaths out of those leaves, braiding in crowflowers, thistles, daisies, and the orchises that vulgar shepherds have an obscene name for, but which pure-minded girls call \"dead men's fingers.\" climbing into the tree to hang the wreath of weeds on the hanging branches, she and her flowers fell into the gurgling brook. her clothes spread out wide in the water, and buoyed her up for a while as she sang bits of old hymns, acting like someone who doesn't realize the danger she's in, or like someone completely accustomed to danger. but it was only a matter of time before her clothes, heavy with the water they absorbed, pulled the poor thing out of her song, down into the mud at the bottom of the brook."], ["so she is drowned.", "drowned, drowned.", "you've had too much water already, poor ophelia, so i won't shed watery tears for you. but crying is what humans do. we do what's in our nature, even if we're ashamed of it. after i stop crying i'll be through acting like a woman. good-bye, my lord. i have some fiery words i could speak now, but my foolish tears are drowning them out.", "let's follow him, gertrude. i worked so hard to calm him down, and now i'm worried he's getting all excited again. let's follow him."], ["are they really going to give her a christian burial", "i'm telling you, yes. so finish that grave right away. the coroner examined her case and says it should be a christian funeral.", "but how, unless she drowned in self-defense?", "that's what they're saying she did.", "sounds more like \"self-offense,\" if you ask me. what i'm saying is, if she knew she was drowning herself, then that's an act. an act has three sides to it: to do, to act, and to perform. therefore she must have known she was drowning herself.", "no, listen here, gravedigger sir", "let me finish. here's the water, right? and here's a man, okay? if the man goes into the water and drowns himself, he's the one doing it, like it or not. but if the water comes to him and drowns him, then he doesn't drown himself. therefore, he who is innocent of his own death does not shorten his own life.", "is that how the law sees it?"], ["it sure is. the coroner's inquest law.", "do you want to know the truth? if this woman hadn't been rich, she wouldn't have been given a christian burial.", "well there, now you've said it. it's a pity that the rich have more freedom to hang or drown themselves than the rest of us christians. come on, shovel. the most ancient aristocrats in the world are gardeners, ditch-diggers, and gravediggers. they keep up adam's profession.", "was he an aristocrat? with a coat of arms?", "he was the first person who ever had arms.", "he didn't have any.", "what, aren't you a christian? the bible says adam dug in the ground. how could he dig without arms? i'll ask you another question. if you can't answer it", "go ahead!", "what do you call a person who builds stronger things than a stonemason, a shipbuilder, or a carpenter does?", "the one who builds the gallows to hang people on, since his structure outlives a thousand inhabitants.", "you're funny, and i like that. the gallows do a good job. but how? it does a good job for those who do bad."], ["now, it's wrong to say that the gallows are stronger than a church. therefore, the gallows may do some good. come on, your turn.", "let's see, \"who builds stronger things than a stonemason, a shipbuilder, or a carpenter?\"", "that's the question, so answer it.", "ah, i've got it!", "go ahead.", "damn, i forgot.", "don't beat your brains out over it. you can't make a slow donkey run by beating it. the next time someone asks you this riddle, say \"a gravedigger.\" the houses he makes last till judgment day. now go and get me some booze.", "gravedigger , .", "doesn't this guy realize what he's doing? he's singing while digging a grave."], ["he's gotten so used to graves that they don't bother him anymore.", "yes, exactly. only people who don't have to work can afford to be sensitive.", ", .", "that skull had a tongue in it once and could sing. that jackass is throwing it around as if it belonged to cain, who did the first murder! it might be the skull of a politician once capable of talking his way around god, right? and now this idiot is pulling rank on him.", "indeed, my lord.", "or a courtier, who could say things like, \"good night, my sweet lord! how are you doing, good lord?\" this might be the skull of lord so-and-so, who praised lord such-and-such's horse when he wanted to borrow it, right?", "yes, my lord.", "exactly. and now it's the property of lady worm, its lower jaw knocked off and thwacked on the noggin with a shovel. that's quite a reversal of fortune, isn't it, if we could only see it? are these bones worth nothing more than bowling pins now? it makes my bones ache to think about it."], [", , .", "there's another. could that be a lawyer's skull? where's all his razzle-dazzle legal jargon now? why does he allow this idiot to knock him on the head with a dirty shovel, instead of suing him for assault and battery? maybe this guy was once a great landowner, with his deeds and contracts, his tax shelters and his annuities. is it part of his deed of ownership to have his skull filled up with dirt? does he only get to keep as much land as a set of contracts would cover if you spread them out on the ground? the deeds to his properties would barely fit in this coffin and the coffin's all the property he gets to keep?", "no more than that, my lord.", "isn't the parchment of a legal document made of sheepskin?", "yes, my lord, and calfskin too.", "anyone who puts his trust in such documents is a sheep or a calf. i'll talk to this guy. excuse me, sir, whose grave is this?", "it's mine, sir."], [".", "i think it really must be yours, since you're the one lying in it.", "and you're lying outside of it, so it's not yours. as for me, i'm not lying to you in it it's really mine.", "but you lying in it, being in it and saying it's yours. it's for the dead, not the living. so you're lying.", "that's a lively lie, sir it jumps so fast from me to you.", "what man are you digging it for?", "for no man, sir.", "what woman, then?", "for no woman, either.", "who's to be buried in it?", "one who used to be a woman but bless her soul is dead now.", "how literal this guy is! we have to speak precisely, or he'll get the better of us with his wordplay. lord, horatio, i've been noticing this for a few years now. the peasants have become so clever and witty that they're nipping at the heels of noblemen. how long have you been a gravedigger?", "of all the days in the year, i started the day that the late king hamlet defeated fortinbras."], ["how long ago was that?", "you don't know that? any fool could tell you, it was the day that young hamlet was born the one who went crazy and got sent off to england.", "why was he sent to england?", "because he was crazy. he'll recover his sanity there. or if he doesn't, it won't matter in england.", "why not?", "because nobody will notice he's crazy. everyone there is as crazy as he is.", "how did he go crazy?", "in a strange way, they say.", "what do you mean, \"in a strange way\"?", "by losing his mind.", "on what grounds?", "right here in denmark. i've been the church warden here for thirty years, since childhood.", "how long will a man lie in his grave before he starts to rot?"], ["well, if he's not rotten before he dies (and there are a lot of people now who are so rotten they start falling to pieces even before you put them in the coffin), he'll last eight or nine years. a leathermaker will last nine years.", "why does he last longer?", "because his hide is so leathery from his trade that he keeps the water off him a long time, and water is what makes your goddamn body rot more than anything. here's a skull that's been here twenty-three years.", "whose was it?", "a crazy bastard. who do you think?", "i really don't know.", "damn that crazy madman! he poured a pitcher of white wine on my head once. this is the skull of yorick, the king's jester.", "this one?", "yes, that one.", "let me see. oh, poor yorick! i used to know him, horatio a very funny guy, and with an excellent imagination. he carried me on his back a thousand times, and now how terrible this is him. it makes my stomach turn. i don't know how many times i kissed the lips that used to be right here. where are your jokes now? your pranks? your songs? your flashes of wit that used to set the whole table laughing? you don't make anybody smile now. are you sad about that? you need to go to my lady's room and tell her that no matter how much makeup she slathers on, she'll end up just like you some day. that'll make her laugh. horatio, tell me something."], ["what's that, my lord?", "do you think alexander the great looked like this when he was buried?", "exactly like that.", "and smelled like that, too? whew!", "just as bad, my lord.", "how low we can fall, horatio. isn't it possible to imagine that the noble ashes of alexander the great could end up plugging a hole in a barrel?", "if you thought that you'd be thinking too much.", "no, not at all. just follow the logic: alexander died, alexander was buried, alexander returned to dust, the dust is dirt, and dirt makes mud we use to stop up holes. so why can't someone plug a beer barrel with the dirt that used to be alexander? the great emperor caesar, dead and turned to clay, might plug up a hole to keep the wind away. oh, to think that the same body that once ruled the world could now patch up a wall! but quiet, be quiet a minute.", "here comes the king, the queen, and the noblemen of court. who are they following? and with such a plain and scrawny ceremony? it means the corpse they're following took its own life. must have been from a wealthy family. let's stay and watch a while."], ["what other rites are you going to give her?", "that's laertes, a very noble young man. listen.", "what other rites are you going to give her?", "i've performed as many rites as i'm permitted. her death was suspicious, and were it not for the fact that the king gave orders to bury her here, she'd have been buried outside the church graveyard. she deserves to have rocks and stones thrown on her body. but she has had prayers read for her and is dressed up like a pure virgin, with flowers tossed on her grave and the bell tolling for her.", "isn't there any other rite you can perform?", "no, nothing. we would profane the other dead souls here if we sang the same requiem for her that we sang for them.", "lay her in the ground, and let violets bloom from her lovely and pure flesh! i'm telling you, you jerk priest, my sister will be an angel in heaven while you're howling in hell.", "horatio what, the beautiful ophelia?"], ["sweet flowers for a sweet girl. goodbye! i once hoped you'd be my hamlet's wife. i thought i'd be tossing flowers on your wedding bed, my sweet girl, not on your grave.", "oh, damn three times, damn ten times the evil man whose wicked deed deprived you of your ingenious mind. hold off burying her until i've caught her in my arms once more.", "now pile the dirt onto the living and the dead alike, till you've made a mountain higher than .", "who is the one whose grief is so loud and clear, whose words of sadness make the planets stand still in the heavens as if they've been hurt by what they've heard? it's me, hamlet the dane.", "to hell with your soul!", "that's no way to pray. please take your hands off my throat. i may not be rash and quick to anger, but i have something dangerous in me which you should beware of. take your hands off.", "pull them apart."], ["hamlet! hamlet!", "gentlemen!", "hamlet please, my lord, calm down.", "i'll fight him over this issue till i don't have the strength to blink.", "oh, my son, what issue is that?", "i loved ophelia. forty thousand brothers, if you added all their love together, couldn't match mine. what are you going to do for her?", "oh, he's crazy, laertes!", "for the love of god, be patient with him.", "damn it, show me what you're going to do for her. will you cry? fight? stop eating? cut yourself? drink vinegar? eat a crocodile? i'll do all that. did you come here to whine? to outdo me by jumping into her grave so theatrically? to be buried alive with her? so will i. and if you rattle on about mountains, then let them throw millions of acres over us. it will be so high a peak that it scrapes against heaven and makes mount ossa look like a wart. see? i can talk crazy as well as you.", "this is pure insanity. he'll be like this for a little while. then he'll be as calm and quiet as a dove waiting for her eggs to hatch."], ["listen, sir, why do you treat me like this? i always loved you. but it doesn't matter. even a hero like hercules can't keep cats from acting like cats, and dogs like dogs.", "please, horatio, go with him.", "laertes don't forget our talk last night, and try to be patient. we'll take care of this problem soon. gertrude, have the guards keep an eye on your son. a monument shall be built for ophelia that will last forever, i promise. we'll have the quiet we need soon. in the meantime, let's proceed patiently."], ["that's enough about that. now i'll tell you the other story about my journey. do you remember the circumstances?", "how could i forget, my lord!", "there was a kind of war in my brain that wouldn't let me sleep. it was worse than being a captive in chains. sometimes it's good to be rash sometimes it works out well to act impulsively when our careful plans lose steam. this should show us that there's a god in heaven who's always guiding us in the right direction, however often we screw up", "well, of course.", "so i came up from my cabin with my robe tied around me, groped in the dark to find what i was looking for, found it, looked through their packet of papers, and returned to my cabin again. i was bold enough (i guess my fears made me forget my manners) to open the document containing the king's instructions. and there i found, horatio, such royal mischief a precisely worded order, sugared with lots of talk about denmark's well-being and england's too, to cut off my head, without even waiting to sharpen the ax."], ["is it possible?", "horatio here's the document. read it in your free time. but do you want to hear what i did then?", "yes, please tell me.", "so there i was, caught in their evil net. before i could even start processing the situation, they had started the ball rolling. i sat down and wrote out a new official document with new instructions. i wrote it in a bureaucrat's neat handwriting. i used to think having nice handwriting was for servants, just like our politicians think, and i had to work hard to overcome that prejudice but it sure came in handy then. do you want to know what i wrote?", "yes, my lord.", "a sincere plea from the king, who commands the respect of england, and who hopes that the love between the two countries can flourish, and that peace can join them in friendship and other fancy mumbo jumbo like that saying that, once they read this document, without any debate, the ones delivering the letter should be put to death immediately, without giving them time to confess to a priest.", "but how could you put an official seal on it?"], ["heaven helped me out with that too. i had my father's signet ring in my pocket, with the royal seal of denmark on it. i folded up the new document, signed it, sealed it, and put it safely back so that no one noticed any difference. the next day we had our fight at sea, and you know what happened after that.", "so rosencrantz and guildenstern are in for it.", "man, they were asking for it. i don't feel guilty about them at all. they got what they deserved. it's always dangerous when little people get caught in the crossfire of mighty opponents.", "what a king claudius is!", "don't you think it's my duty now to kill him with this weapon? this man who killed my king, made my mother a whore, took the throne that i hoped for, and set a trap to kill me. isn't it completely moral to kill him now with this sword and an easy conscience? and wouldn't i be damned if i let this monster live to do more harm?", "he'll find out soon what happened in england."], ["soon enough. but i have the meantime. a human life is hardly long enough to count to one in. but i really feel bad, horatio, about losing control of myself with laertes. his situation is very much like my own. i'll be nice to him. it was just that the showiness of his grief sent me into a fury.", "hang on a minute who are you?", "welcome back to denmark, my lord.", "thank you kindly, sir. horatio do you know this insect?", "hamlet no, my lord.", "horatio you're lucky, since knowing him is most unpleasant. he owns a lot of good land. give an animal a lot of money, and he'll be welcome at the king's table. he's a jerk, but he owns a whole lot of dirt, so he's treated well.", "my lord, if you have a free moment, i have a message from his majesty.", "i'll hang on every word you say. put your hat back on, where it belongs: it's for your head, not for your hands to hold.", "no thank you, my lord. it's very hot."], ["no, i'm telling you, it's very cold, with a northerly wind.", "it is rather cold, indeed, my lord.", "and yet i feel it's very hot and humid, which is bad for my complexion.", "yes indeed it is, sir. very humid, i can't tell you how humid it is. my lord, his majesty wanted me to tell you that he's placed a large bet on you. this is what it's all about", "please, i beg you osric", "no, my lord, i'm comfortable like this, thank you. sir, there's someone named laertes who's recently come to the court. he's an absolute gentleman, totally outstanding in so many respects, very easy in society, and displaying all his excellent qualities. , i'd have to say he's like a business card for the upper classes he's that wonderful. you'll find that he's the sum total of what a perfect gentleman should be.", "sir, your description of him doesn't detract from his good qualities, though i know that trying to list them all would make your head spin, and even so you wouldn't be able to keep up with him."], ["speaking the very truth of high praise, i can honestly say that i find him to possess a soul of such great importance, and so rare and unique in every respect, that to speak the absolute truth he can find an equal only when he gazes into a mirror. anyone else is just a pale copy of him.", "you speak absolutely correctly, sir.", "and what's the point, sir? why are we talking about him like this?", "sorry, sir?", "hamlet can't you talk to him in a different way?", "osric what is the significance of referring to this individual?", "laertes, you mean?", "hamlet all his fancy language has run out finally; his pockets are empty.", "yes, laertes, sir.", "i know you know something", "thanks for the compliment, i'm happy you know that. but in fact it doesn't say much. i'm sorry, you were saying?", "i know you know something about how excellent laertes is"], ["i can't admit that, since you'd have to compare his excellence to mine. but knowing a person well is a bit like knowing oneself.", "excellent in fencing, i mean, sir. his reputation in fencing is unrivaled.", "what kind of weapon does he use?", "the rapier and the dagger.", "those are only two of his weapons. but, go on.", "the king has bet six barbary horses, and he has prepared six french rapiers and daggers with all their accessories. three of the carriages are very imaginatively designed, and they match the fencing accessories.", "what do you mean by \"carriages\"?", "hamlet i knew you'd have to look something up in the dictionary before we were finished.", "the carriages, sir, are the hangers where the swords hang.", "\"carriage\" makes it sound like it's pulling around a cannon. i prefer to call it a \"hanger.\" but anyway. six barbary horses, six french swords with accessories, and three imaginatively designed carriages sounds like a french bet against the danish. why has all this been put on the table?", "the king, sir, has bet that in a dozen rounds between you and laertes, he won't beat you by more than three hits. you could get started immediately if you'll give me your answer."], ["but what if my answer's no?", "i mean, if you'd agree to play against laertes, sir.", "sir, i'm going to go for a walk in the hall here whether the king likes it or not. it's my exercise time. bring in the swords, if the king still wants to go through with it and if laertes is still willing. i'll have the king win his bet if i can. if not, i'll only have suffered some embarrassment and a few sword hits.", "shall i quote you in those exact words, sir?", "just get the point across, however flowery you want to be.", "my services are at your command.", "thank you.", "it's a good thing he's here to recommend himself. no one else would.", "that crazy bird's only half-hatched.", "he used to praise his mother's nipple before he sucked it. he's like so many successful people in these trashy times he's patched together enough fancy phrases and trendy opinions to carry him along. but blow a little on this bubbly talk, and it'll burst. there's no substance here."], ["my lord, osric has told the king about your agreeing to the fencing match. the king wishes to know if you want to play against him right away, or wait awhile.", "i'll do whatever the king wants. if he's ready now, so am i. otherwise, i'll do it anytime, as long as i'm able.", "the king and queen are coming down with everyone else.", "right on cue.", "the queen wants you to chat with laertes politely before you begin your match.", "she's full of good advice.", "you're going to lose this bet, my lord.", "i don't think so. i've been practicing fencing constantly since he went off to france. with the handicap they've given me, i think i'll win. but i have a sinking feeling anyway. oh well.", "wait, my lord", "i know i'm being foolish, but i have the kind of vague misgiving women often get."], ["if something is telling you not to play, listen to it. i'll say you're not feeling well.", "you'll do no such thing. i thumb my nose at superstitions. god controls everything even something as trivial as a sparrow's death. everything will work out as it is destined. if something is supposed to happen now, it will. if it's supposed to happen later, it won't happen now. what's important is to be prepared. since nobody knows anything about what he leaves behind, then what does it mean to leave early? let it be.", "come shake hands with laertes, hamlet. (claudius laertes' hamlet's )", "laertes i beg your pardon, sir. i've done you wrong. forgive me as a gentleman. everyone here knows and i'm sure you've heard that i'm suffering from a serious mental illness. when i insulted you it was due to insanity. was hamlet the one who insulted laertes? no, not hamlet. if hamlet is robbed of his own mind, and insults laertes when he's not really himself, then hamlet's not guilty of the offense. who is guilty, then? hamlet's mental illness is."], ["and if that's true, then hamlet is the victim of his own illness his illness is his enemy. sir, with this audience as witness, let me declare that i'm as innocent of premeditated evil against you as i would be if i had happened to shoot an arrow over my house and accidentally hit my brother.", "my feelings are satisfied even though what you have done to my father and sister should drive me to revenge. yet when it comes to my honor, i can't forgive you so fast. i will accept no apology until experts in matters of honor show me how to make peace with you without staining my own reputation in doing so. until then i will accept your love as love.", "i'm grateful for your love. come on, give us the swords, and we will play this friendly fencing match enthusiastically.", "yes, hand me one too.", "i'm going to make you look sharp, laertes. i'm so bad at the game that your skill will shine like the brightest star in the darkest night.", "you're making fun of me.", "no, i swear i'm not.", "give them the swords, osric. hamlet, you know the bet?", "yes, my lord, quite well. you've bet on the weaker fencer."], ["i'm not worried. i've seen both of you fence. but since laertes is better, we've given him a handicap. he's got to outdo you by three hits to win.", "this sword's too heavy. show me another one.", "i like this one. are they all the same length?", "yes, my lord.", "put the goblets of wine on that table. if hamlet makes the first or second hit, or gets back at laertes by making the third hit, then let my soldiers give him a military salute. i'll drink to hamlet's health, and into his goblet i'll drop a pearl even more costly than those in the crowns of the last four danish kings. give me the goblets. and now let the drum and the trumpet play, and the trumpet signal the cannon outside to fire, and let the cannon tell the heavens, and the heavens tell all the earth that the king is drinking now to hamlet's health. come on, let's begin. judges, pay close attention.", "come on, sir.", "come on, my lord."], ["that was one hit.", "no, it wasn't.", "referee!", "it was obviously a hit.", "well, let's go on.", "give me a goblet. hamlet, this pearl's yours. here's to your health.", "give him the goblet.", "let me just finish this round. set it down awhile. let's play.", "another hit. what do you say?", "you got me, i admit it.", "my son will win.", "he's flabby and out of breath. here, hamlet, take my handkerchief and wipe your forehead. the queen drinks to your good luck and happiness, hamlet."], ["thank you, madam.", "gertrude, don't drink that.", "excuse me. i'll drink it if i like.", "that was the poisoned drink. it's too late.", "i'd better not drink now. i'll drink later.", "come on, let me wipe your face.", "claudius i'll get him now.", "i doubt it.", "but i almost feel guilty.", "get ready for the third hit, laertes. you're just playing around. come on, give me your best shot. i sense you're treating me like a child.", "you think so? come on.", "they're neck and neck.", "take this!", "separate them. they're overdoing it."], ["no, come on, one more time.", "take care of the queen!", "both fencers are bleeding how do you feel, my lord?", "how do you feel, laertes?", "like a mouse caught in my own trap, osric. ( ) i've been killed by my own evil tricks.", "how's the queen?", "she fainted at the sight of them bleeding.", "no, no, the drink, the drink! oh, my dear hamlet! the drink, the drink! i've been poisoned.", "oh, what evil! lock the door.", "we've been betrayed! find out who did it!", "i'm the one, hamlet. hamlet, you're dead. no medicine in the world can cure you. you don't have more than half an hour to live. the treacherous weapon is right in your hand, sharp and dipped in poison. the foul plan backfired on me. here i lie and will never get up again. your mother's been poisoned. i can't speak anymore. the king, the king's to blame.", "the blade poisoned! then get to work, poison!"], ["treason! treason!", "protect me, my friends. i've only been hurt, not killed.", "here, you goddamn incest-breeding danish murderer, drink this. is your little pearl in there? follow my mother.", "he got what he deserved. he mixed that poison himself. please forgive me as i forgive you, hamlet. you're not responsible for my death and my father's, and i'm not responsible for yours.", "god will free you from blame. i'll follow you to heaven in a minute. i'm dying, horatio. goodbye, miserable queen. and all you people watching, pale and trembling, speechless spectators of these acts, i could tell you a thing or two if i had the time (though this cruel officer, death, doesn't allow much free time). let it be. horatio, i'm dying. you're alive. tell everyone what happened; set the story straight.", "not for a second. i'm more like an ancient roman than a corrupt modern dane. some of this liquor's still left in the goblet."], ["please, give me that goblet, if you love me. let go of it! i'll get it from you, i swear. oh god, horatio, what a damaged reputation i'm leaving behind me, as no one knows the truth. if you ever loved me, then please postpone the sweet relief of death awhile, and stay in this harsh world long enough to tell my story.", "what are these warlike noises?", "young fortinbras, returning in triumph from poland, is firing his guns to greet the english ambassadors.", "oh, i'm dying, horatio! this strong poison's overpowering me. i will not live to hear the news from england. but i bet fortinbras will win the election to the danish crown. he's got my vote as i die. so tell him that, given the recent events here oh, the rest is silence. oh, oh, oh, oh.", "now a noble heart is breaking. good night, sweet prince. may hosts of angels sing you to sleep. why are those drums approaching?"], ["what do i see here?", "what would you like to see? if it's a tragedy, you've come to the right place.", "these corpses suggest mayhem. oh, proud death, what banquet are you preparing that you've needed to knock off so many princes at one stroke?", "this is a horrible sight. our news arrives from england too late, since the people that should have heard it are dead. we meant to tell the king that his orders have been carried out, and rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead. who will thank us now?", "claudius not the king, even if he were still alive to thank you. he never ordered their deaths. but since you've come so soon after this bloodbath, you from battles in poland and you from england, then give your men orders to display these corpses on a high platform, and let me tell the world how all this happened.you'll hear of violent and unnatural acts, terrible accidents, casual murders, deaths caused by trickery and by threat, and finally murderous plans that backfired on their perpetrators. all this i can explain.", "let's hear about it right away and invite all the noblemen to listen. as for me, i welcome my good luck with sadness. i have some rights to claim this kingdom, and by arriving at this moment i have an opportunity to put them into effect."], ["i also have a few things to say about that, which hamlet just told me. but let's get down to business even though people are in a frenzy of grief to avoid any further plots and mishaps.", "let four captains carry hamlet like a soldier onto the stage. he would have been a great king if he had had the chance to prove himself. military music and military rites will speak for his heroic qualities. pick up the corpses. a sight like this suits a battlefield, but here at court it shows that much went wrong. go outside and tell the soldiers to fire their guns in honor of hamlet."]], [], [], [["if only we had divine inspiration, our play might rise to the highest level of imagination. if we had a stage as big as a kingdom, real kings and queens to act the part of kings and queens, and royalty to also witness the glorious spectacle, then it would be as it really was. then valiant king harry would resemble the god of war, as he did in life, and famine, sword, and fire would sit like dogs at his feet, waiting to be unleashed. but, ladies and gentlemen, since that's not the case, you must forgive us plain, ordinary men who dare to act out so great a story on this humble stage. can this theater seem to contain the sweeping fields of france? could we even squeeze into this little theater the helmets that looked so frightening at agincourt? hardly! but, pardon us, because just as a few strokes of a pen, a few zeros, can signify a huge number, we, who are zeros in this great story, can work on your imagination. pretend that within the confines of this theater sit two great kingdoms divided by a narrow but perilous ocean. let your thoughts make up for our imperfections. divide each man into a thousand, and there you will have an imaginary army. imagine, when we talk of horses, that you see them planting their proud hooves in the soft earth. because now it is your thoughts that must dress up our kings and transport them from place to place. your thoughts must leap over huge spans of time, turning the events of many"], ["years into the space of a few hours. to that end, consider me a sort of chorus, here to help tell the story. and, as the speaker of any prologue should, i ask you to hear our play courteously and to judge it kindly."], ["my lord, this bill that's being proposed is the same one that was proposed in the eleventh year of old king henry's reign. everyone thought it would pass then, and it probably would have had it not been for the great civil unrest and uncertainty of the time, which required the matter to be put off.", "but how will we keep it from being passed now, my lord?", "we have to think about that. if it does pass, the church will lose more than half of what it possesses, because the bill would strip us of enough real estate left to the church by wealthy, pious men in their wills to support fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, six thousand two hundred squires, and a hundred well-supplied almshouses for the relief of lepers, old-age pensioners, the poor, and those too weak or sick to work. add to that a yearly sum of a thousand pounds to go directly into the king's coffers. that's what the bill says.", "that would be quite a drain.", "it would drain us dry.", "but what can be done to prevent it?", "the king is virtuous and kind.", "and a true lover of the holy church."], ["you wouldn't have expected it based on how he acted as a youth. but no sooner had his father stopped breathing than the prince's wildness died too. really, at that precise moment he gained a capacity for reflection, which appeared like an angel to chase away the sinful part of him, leaving his body like a paradise, fit to house only lofty thoughts and feelings. you never saw anyone become serious and studious so quickly. you never saw such a total transformation, as though a wild river, rushing through, had swept away his faults. such a collection of stubborn character flaws was never banished from one place so suddenly as in the case of this king.", "we are fortunate in the change.", "if you just listen to him discuss theological matters, you'll find yourself thinking privately what an excellent bishop he would make. hear him debate matters of domestic policy, and you'd swear he had made them his constant study. listen to him talk about war, and you'll hear elegant and thrilling accounts of the battles. bring up any political topic, and he'll untangle it as easily as if it were his own . and the result is that when he speaks, the very air which is free to go where it likes stops dead, and men stand in silent wonder, hoping to catch the benefit of his gorgeous utterances. there must be skill and experience behind all this abstract thought, but it's anyone's guess how he obtained it, since in his youth he preferred shallow pursuits, with uneducated, crude and superficial companions. he spent his time drunken, overfed, and constantly seeking out entertainment, with no inclination for learning or quiet contemplation, nor any limit to his tolerance for public haunts and crowds."], ["strawberries grow underneath nettle plants, and berries grow best when they're planted next to inferior fruit. in the same way, the prince hid his serious side under the guise of wild behavior. just like summer grass, which grows fastest during the night, this sober quality was able to grow and thrive all the better for being undetected.", "that must be it, because the age of miracles is passed, and we have to find reasonable explanations for why these things happen.", "but tell me, my lord: as to the softening of this bill proposed by the house of commons, does his majesty favor it or not?", "he seems neutral, perhaps leaning a little more toward our side than that of our opponents since i've made his majesty an offer, following a meeting with our fellow bishops. the offer regards certain matters having to do with france that his grace and i have been discussing. my offer would involve us giving him a greater sum than the clergy ever gave at one time to any of his predecessors.", "how did he take the offer, my lord?"], ["favorably, except that there wasn't enough time for his grace to hear, as i sensed he would have liked to, the details about how he is rightfully entitled to certain dukedoms in france, and to the throne of france in general, through clear lines of descent originating with his great-grandfather, edward iii.", "what kept you from telling him this?", "the french ambassador arrived at that moment and asked to see the king. and, in fact, i think they're meeting together right now. is it four o'clock?", "it is.", "then let's go in and hear what he has to say though i think i can guess before the frenchman has uttered a word.", "i'll accompany you. i'm also eager to hear it."], ["where is my gracious lord of canterbury?", "he's not here.", "send for him, dear uncle.", "shall we call in the ambassador, my liege?", "not yet, cousin. before i hear him, i want to decide some important issues that are on my mind concerning my throne and france.", "may god and his angels guard your sacred throne and grant that you dignify it for a long time.", "thank you, i'm sure. my learned lord, kindly explain to us the legal and religious grounds for why this french salic law either should or shouldn't bar me in my claim. and god forbid, my dear and faithful lord, that you should invent, twist, or distort your interpretation, or burden your conscience by subtly arguing for false claims. for god knows how many healthy men will shed their blood in support of whatever you persuade me to do. so think carefully before you incite me"], ["to wage war. i charge you, in the name of god, be careful what you say. for mighty kingdoms such as england and france have never gone to war with one another without much bloodshed, every innocent drop of which cries out against the wrongdoer who caused such loss of life without good reason. with this in mind, speak, my lord. and i will listen, consider, and earnestly believe that what you say is spoken with a conscience as pure as a newly baptized soul.", "then hear me, gracious sovereign, and all you peers who owe your lives and duty to this imperial throne. there is no legal obstacle to your highness's claim to france except the following rule, which the french cite from king pharamond: (no woman shall inherit property in the salic land). the french wrongly interpret \"the salic land\" to mean france, and they cite pharamond as the founder of this law that bars female succession to the throne. but their own authors assert that the salic land is in germany, between the sala and the elbe rivers, where charles the great left behind certain french settlements after conquering the saxons. the french settlers despised the german women because they were unfaithful to their husbands, so the settlers passed this law that no woman should have right of inheritance in salic land. and the salic land the region between the elbe and the sala, in germany, as i said is now called meissen. it is clear, then, that the salic law was not"], ["intended for the realm of france. nor did the french possess the salic land until four hundred twenty-one years after the death of king pharamond, incorrectly thought to be the founder of the law. he died in the year 426, and charles the great conquered the saxons and settled frenchmen in the region beyond the river sala in the year 805. besides, according to the french historians, king pepin, who deposed childeric, based his own claim to the crown of france on his descent from blithild, the daughter of king clothair. another case: hugh capet, who usurped the crown from charles the duke of lorraine sole male heir in a direct line from charles the great passed himself off as heir to lady lingare, daughter of charlemagne, who was the son of lewis the emperor (who was the son of charles the great), in order to give his claim to the throne more validity (though, in fact, the claim was completely false and worthless). another case: king lewis the tenth, who was sole heir to the usurper capet, could not rest easy as king until he was assured that queen isabel, his grandmother, was a direct descendent of the lady ermengare, daughter of the aforementioned charles duke of lorraine, by which marriage the line of charles the great was reunited with the throne of france. thus, it should be clear as day that king pepin's title, hugh capet's claim, and the resolution of king lewis's doubts all plainly derive from the female."], ["to this day, the kings of france follow this unspoken rule, even though they point to this salic law to bar your highness from inheriting it through the female line. they prefer to obscure matters rather than reveal how corrupt their own claims to the french crown are. they usurped that crown from you and your ancestors.", "can i justifiably and in good conscience make this claim?", "if not, mighty sovereign, let the blame be mine. for it is written in the book of numbers: \"when the man dies, let the inheritance descend unto the daughter.\" gracious lord, claim what is yours. unfurl your banners of war. take your mighty ancestors as models. go to the tomb of your great-grandfather, from whom your own title to the crown derives. invoke his warlike spirit and that of edward the black prince, your great-uncle, who fought a tragic battle on french soil, routing the french army in full force while his mighty father stood by on a hilltop, smiling to see his son steeped in the blood of french noblemen. o noble english, who could take on the entire french army with only half their forces, leaving the other half to stand by, idle and laughing.", "awaken the memory of those valiant ancestors and with your own powerful arm make their deeds live again. you are their heir and sit on their throne, and the blood and courage that glorified them run in your veins. you, my most powerful sovereign, are in the very prime of youth, ripe for glorious deeds and great enterprises."], ["the other kings throughout the world all expect you to take the offensive, just like your lion-hearted forebears.", "they know your grace has justification, as well as the money and military strength. and so you do. no king of england was ever backed by wealthier nobles or more loyal subjects. their bodies may remain here in england, but their hearts are encamped on the fields of france already.", "oh, let their bodies follow, my dear king, to win back what's rightfully yours with blood and sword and fire. and to that end, we, the clergy, will raise your highness a sum greater than your ancestors were ever given at any one time.", "we must not only arm ourselves to invade france, but must also apportion troops to defend against invasion by the scots, who will see this as a perfect opportunity to attack.", "your subjects in the north, gracious sovereign, will provide a wall of defense against scottish thieves across the border.", "i don't mean merely bands of thieves. what we have to worry about is a full-scale invasion from scotland always an unreliable neighbor. you'll find that my great-grandfather never went to war with france without scotland making an attack on his undefended kingdom, pouring in full force like the tide through a gap in a dyke, troubling the depleted country with violent attacks, and laying siege to towns and castles. the whole of england, being unprotected, trembled with fear."], ["but the country was more frightened than hurt, my liege. take this example: when all its knights have been in france and all its noblemen absent, england has not only defended itself well, but actually seized the scottish king and penned him up like a stray dog. then he was sent off to france. he enhanced king edward's fame, adding royalty to his captives and thus making england's own history as rich with glory as the muddy floor of the sea is rich with sunken ships and innumerable treasures.", "but here's an old, true saying: \"if you want to win france, start with scotland.\" for when the eagle england leaves her nest to seek prey, the weasel scot always comes sneaking around to suck dry her princely eggs and, like the mouse when the cat's away, destroy more than she can actually eat.", "it would follow from this that the cat should stay home. but that is a false conclusion, since we have locks to keep our valuables safe and clever traps to catch little thieves. while the armed hand fights in foreign lands, the wise head defends itself at home. for though the state is divided into different levels and functions, it all works in agreement for a unified purpose, a natural and perfect end such as we find in music."], ["that is why god divided humanity into various functions, so as to keep human endeavor moving ever forward, the one single fixed element the aim being obedience. honey bees operate in just such a communal way. in fact, you can learn a lot about how to run a well-ordered kingdom from these creatures. they have a king and officers of sorts. some, like magistrates, dole out punishment at home, while others venture forth for commerce, like merchants. still others, armed like soldiers with stingers, pillage the summer flowers, bringing the booty triumphantly home to the royal tent of their emperor, who is preoccupied with governing. the emperor supervises the masons as they build gold roofs, the ordinary citizens as they process the honey, the humble laborers as they crowd through the city's narrow gate with their heavy burdens, and the solemn-looking judge (with his grouchy hum) as he delivers lazy, unproductive drones to pale executioners. from this, i conclude that many different elements can work toward one common end just as many arrows, shot from different points, converge on a single target; just as many roads meet in a single town; just as many fresh streams empty into only one salt sea; just as the many radiuses of a unite at its center. just so, a thousand actions, once set in motion, will result in one desired object, and all will be well carried out and have a successful end. therefore, head to france, my liege! divide your lucky england into four. if you take even one quarter with you to france, you will nevertheless make the whole country shake."], ["if we cannot defend our country with three times such a power left at home, then we deserve to be harassed by an invader and lose our reputation as a powerful and politically savvy nation.", "call in the messengers sent from the dauphin.", "now i've made up my mind, and with god's help and yours, you nobles who are the mainstay of my power i'll force france to fear me, or i'll break her into pieces, as she's rightfully mine. either i'll sit, ruling with absolute authority over france and all her dukedoms, or i'll lay these bones in a common grave, with no stone or inscription over them. either the story of my deeds will be declaimed loudly and without restraint, or else my grave will remain speechless, like a turkish mute, not honored with even an epitaph etched in wax.", "i'm ready now to hear what my good cousin the dauphin has to say for i hear that the greeting you bear is from him, not the king.", "will your majesty grant us permission to freely express the message we've been asked to convey? or should we be tactful and only hint at what the dauphin sent us to say?"], ["i am no tyrant but a christian king, whose emotions are as tightly controlled as the wretches who languish in our prisons. therefore tell me the dauphin's mind frankly and without constraint.", "here it is then, in as few words as possible. your highness recently sent word to france claiming certain dukedoms as your own, in the name of your great ancestor, king edward the third. by way of answer, the prince our master says that you're acting like the immature youth that you are. he warns you to take note: there's nothing in france that you can win by dancing. you can't party your way into dukedoms there. he therefore sends you this casket of treasure as a gift more suited to your character. and in return for this gift, he wishes you to drop your claim to the dukedoms. this is the dauphin's message.", "what's the treasure, uncle?", "tennis balls, my liege.", "i'm happy the dauphin has such a good sense of humor. thank you for his present and your trouble. once i've put my rackets to these balls, i'll play a set in france, god willing, that will knock his father's crown right out of the court. tell him he's got himself such a willing opponent that we'll be chasing balls all over france. and i understand perfectly his sneering reference to my wilder days. he doesn't realize how useful they were to me. for a long time, i didn't value this humble throne of england, and therefore lived at some remove and gave myself over to riotous living. men tend to be at their most irresponsible when they're away from home. but tell the dauphin i will retain the dignity of kingship and appear all the more royal and glorious on the throne of france. precisely for this purpose i went about like a commoner and experienced the life of the ordinary man. now i'll rise there with"], ["such glory that i'll dazzle all the eyes of france. i'll shine so brightly that even the dauphin will be struck blind. and tell the laughing prince that this joke of his has transformed his tennis balls into cannon balls, and the destructive vengeance they bring with them will be his responsibility. his mocking will mock many thousands of widows out of their husbands. it will mock mothers out of their sons, and mock castles down. there are people yet unborn and unconceived who will have reason to curse the dauphin's scorn. but all this lies with god, to whom i do appeal. in god's name, inform the dauphin i am coming, to avenge myself and to put forth my rightful hand in a sanctified cause. so go in peace. and tell the dauphin his joke will look pretty stupid when thousands more weep than ever laughed at it. give them safe conduct. farewell.", "that was a humorous message."], ["i hope to make the sender blush for it. now, lords, don't let slip any opportunity that might be advantageous for our expedition. my thoughts are now bent entirely on france except my thoughts about god, who takes precedence over this undertaking. therefore, let's set about mustering the requisite number of troops and give consideration to anything that can be expected to speed our enterprise. for, with god on our side, we'll chastise this prince on his father's own doorstep. therefore, let every man give some thought to how this noble expedition may be undertaken."], ["now all the young men of england are inspired and have stored their party clothes in the closet. armorers are doing great business, and all men think about is honor. people are selling off their land to buy warhorses so they can follow the exemplary king into battle as if they had winged feet, like . there's a sense of anticipation in the air. in the minds of harry and his followers, visions of the kingdoms, spoils, and titles to be won eclipse thoughts of actual fighting. the french, meanwhile, have been forewarned of all this preparation by their spies and tremble in fear. they seek to derail the english with cowardly tricks. oh, england! you are physically small but inwardly great, like a mighty heart enclosed in a small body. there is nothing you couldn't accomplish if all your subjects were loyal and loving! but, see, the king of france has detected your weak spot: a nest of faithless traitors, whose treachery he has purchased with gold. three corrupt men richard, earl of cambridge; henry, lord scroop of masham; and sir thomas grey, knight, of northumberland have agreed to conspire with the french in exchange for money. the gracious king will die by their hands in southampton before he sets sail for france if hell and treason have their way. stick with us, ladies and gentlemen, and we'll make a play, conquering space and time. imagine that the traitors have been paid and made their choice. the king has left london, and the scene now"], ["shifts, friends, to southampton. that's where you must pretend the theater is; that's where you must sit. from there we'll safely carry you to france and back, calming the waters of the channel to provide you with a smooth voyage. for if we can help it, we'd just as soon nobody was made sick by our play. but we won't shift the scene to southampton until henry reappears."], ["good to see you, corporal nym.", "good day, lieutenant bardolph.", "tell me, are you and ensign pistol friends again yet?", "for my part, i really don't care. i don't say much, but when the time comes, we'll smile at each other. but that's as it may be. i won't fight, but i can close my eyes and take a swipe with my sword just a simple sword, but so what? it's good enough to toast cheese, and it will survive cold as well as another man's sword. and that's that.", "i'll buy you both breakfast if it will make you two friends. then we can all three be comrades on our way to france. how about it, corporal nym?", "well, i will live until i die, that's for sure, and when i can't live anymore, i'll deal with it. that's it. that's really all i can say.", "it's true, corporal, that he is married to nell quickly. and it's true that she did you wrong, since you were engaged to her.", "it's not for me to say. things are what they are. men may sleep, and when they do they may have their throats with them, and some people say knives have blades. what must be must be, and though my patience is worn out, it will last a little longer. there must be some resolution. well, it's not for me to say."], ["here comes ensign pistol and his wife. be cool now, corporal. how are you, pistol, my good host?", "you peasant dog, are you calling me a host? i swear, i scorn the word. my nell isn't going to be taking any lodgers.", "no, not for long, that's certain. for we couldn't even put up a dozen or so nice girls who make an honest living sewing without our neighbors thinking we were running a brothel.", "oh, dear. if he isn't cut down in his tracks right now, we'll see committed.", "good lieutenant, good corporal, don't fight each other here.", "pish!", "pish to you, you mangy dog, you pointy-eared icelandic mutt.", "corporal nym, be a man and put away your sword.", "get lost, will you? ( pistol) i'd like to get you ."], ["you unspeakable dog? you loathsome snake, i throw your in that weird face of yours, in your teeth and your throat and in your hateful lungs, and even worse, in your nasty mouth! shove that into your bowels, because i can take you. my gun is cocked and ready to fire.", "i am not some fiend of hell: you can't get rid of me with spells. i'm in a mood to beat you up pretty good. if you get nasty with me, pistol, i'll stab you with my sword, in fair play. if you'd like to step aside with me, i'll give you a little prick in the guts, all in fair play, if i can, and that's the way it is.", "you revolting braggart and hellish creature! your grave is gaping open, and your death is near. so take your last breath.", "listen, listen to what i say: whoever strikes first, i'll run him through with my sword, as sure as i'm a soldier.", "that's an oath of great power, and our fury must subside. pistol nym give me your hand your forefoot. you have a brave spirit.", "i'll cut your throat, sooner or later that's just how it is.", "is the word for what you're trying to say. i defy you again. you dog, do you think you'll take my wife? no, go to the hospital, into the ward where they treat venereal disease, and get yourself a leprous, diseased prostitute like doll tearsheet and marry her."], ["i won the former mistress quickly and i'll keep her as my only wife, and damn it! that's enough. come on!", "my host pistol, you must come to my master. you too, my hostess: he is very sick and should be put to bed. bardolph, put your face between his sheets and act as a . really, he's very sick!", "get out of here, you punk!", "i swear, he'll be food for the crows soon. the king has broken his heart. good husband, come home soon.", "come on, can i get you two to make up? we have to go to france together: why should we cut each other's throats?", "let rivers flood and fiends howl for food!", "are you going to pay the eight shillings i won from you in a bet?", "paying debts is for peasants.", "i'm going to take it from you now. that's how it is.", "we'll see, won't we? do your best."], ["by this sword, i'll kill whichever one of you makes the first thrust. by this sword, i will.", "\"by this sword\" is an oath, and oaths must be kept.", "corporal nym, if you want to be friends, be friends. if not, then you can be my enemy, too. come on, put it away.", "i'll give you a right now, and i'll give you liquor, too, and friendship and brotherhood. i'll live for nym, and nym will live for me. is that fair? for i'll be selling provisions to the troops, and there'll be profits to go around. give me your hand.", "i'll get my noble?", "in cash.", "well, then, that's how it is.", "if you ever had a mother, come in quickly to sir john. the poor thing, he is so shaken with a fever that it's terrible to see. sweet men, come to him.", "the king has done him a bad turn. that's all there is to it."], ["nym, what you say is true. his heart is broken and .", "the king is a good king, but things must be as they may. he has his moods and his ways.", "let us go sit with the knight; for, my little lambs, we will survive him."], ["i must say, the king is taking a bold risk letting these traitors go free.", "they'll be arrested in a little while.", "how smooth and cool they seem! just as if they were perfectly loyal and faithful.", "the king has been informed of all their plans, but they have no idea.", "no, but it's unbelievable that the man who was his dearest friend, a man he has showered with love and favor, would repay the king with treachery, selling his own sovereign's life to a foreign power!", "now that the wind is favorable, let's board the ship. my lord of cambridge and my good lord of masham and you, my noble knight, what do you think? will our army cut a swath through the fighting force of france, achieving and accomplishing everything i've assembled them to do?", "no doubt it will, my liege, if each man does his best."], ["i have no doubt about that, since i know there isn't a man among us who isn't with me wholeheartedly, or a soul left behind who doesn't wish us success and conquest.", "there never was a monarch better feared and loved than yourself, your majesty. i don't think there's a single unhappy subject living under the protection of your government.", "true. those who were bitter enemies of your father in his time have turned their bitterness to sweetness, serving you loyally and wholeheartedly.", "yes, i have great cause to be thankful. i'm more likely to forget how to use my own hand than how to reward virtue and merit as they deserve.", "and so your subjects serve you all the more energetically, hopeful of success and reward.", "i expect no less. uncle of exeter, release the man who was arrested yesterday for railing against me. i believe he only did it because he drank too much, and now that he's had a chance to think about his actions, i can pardon him.", "that's merciful but a bit careless. he should be punished, your majesty. if we tolerate such behavior, we're in danger of encouraging it.", "oh, let us be merciful anyway."], ["your highness could be merciful but still punish.", "sir, it would be merciful to let him live beating him severely.", "i'm afraid your great love and concern for me lead you to deal too harshly with this poor fellow. if minor lapses caused by drunkenness are not to be tolerated, how will we punish capital crimes that result from much planning and forethought? no, i'll have that man released, despite the fact that cambridge, scroop, and grey, in their extreme concern for my safety, would prefer that he were punished. and now, let's turn to our business with the french. who are the new commissioners?", "i am one, my lord. your highness told me to ask for my commission today.", "you told me to do the same, my liege.", "and me, too, my royal sovereign.", "in that case, there is yours, richard earl of cambridge; there yours, lord scroop of masham; and, sir knight, grey of northumberland, this one is yours. read them, and trust that i recognize your true worth. my lord of westmoreland, and uncle exeter, we will set sail night. why, what's this, gentlemen! what's in those papers that makes you change color? look how pale they're turning! their cheeks are like paper. what are you reading that makes you turn white?"], ["i confess my crime and throw myself on your highness's mercy.", "to which we all appeal.", "the mercy that was alive in me a moment ago was smothered and killed by your own advice. for shame, don't talk of mercy. your own arguments turn against you, like dogs who bite their own masters. princes and noble peers, take a look at these english monsters. cambridge here, you know how i favored him and treated him with every respect due his rank. he was bought for a few coins, entering easily into this conspiracy with the french, promising to kill me here in southhampton. and this knight, whom i've treated as generously as i have cambridge, also joined the plot. but, oh, what can i say to you, lord scroop? you cruel, ungrateful, savage, and inhuman creature! you who had access to all my thoughts, who knew me to the inmost part of my soul, who could have had any amount of gold from me if you'd needed it and only asked me: is it possible that a foreign power could find in you even enough evil to injure one of my fingers? though the truth of your treachery is as plain as black on white, i can scarcely believe it, it's so past understanding. treason and murder have always gone together, like two devils joined in a common purpose. that's natural. but you, against all reason, added something new to the equation. you added the sheer improbability that you could do this. whatever fiend it was that seduced you must win the prize for excellence in hell. all other devils who tempt people to treason patch together some motive, put together from shreds"], ["and patches of righteousness. but the devil that tempted you gave you no reason why you should commit treason other than to win the name of traitor. the demon who seduced you could stride the world over with the proud gait of a lion, could return to hell and tell the devil's legions, \"i will never win another soul as easily as i won that englishman's.\" how you have poisoned my faith in people! now i am suspicious of everyone. are there men who appear dutiful? why, so did you. are there those who seem serious and knowledgeable? why, so did you. do they come from good families? why, so did you. do they seem religious? why, so did you. do they live in moderation, free from excessive emotion stable rather than changing their minds constantly tastefully dressed, not merely seeing but also listening, and trusting no impression without confirmation? that's how sound a man you appeared. your fall has left a blot that opens even the best and brightest to suspicion. you have broken my heart. this treachery of yours is like the second . their crimes are revealed. arrest and punish them according to the law, and may god pardon them for what they would have done."], ["richard earl of cambridge, i arrest you for high treason. henry lord scroop of masham, i arrest you for high treason. thomas grey, knight, of northumberland, i arrest you for high treason.", "a just god has discovered our plot. i regret my crime more than my death, and i beg your highness to forgive me, while punishing my body with death.", "for my part, i didn't do it for the money, though i admit the money encouraged me to do what i was planning sooner. but i thank god that i failed in my scheme, and i rejoice in paying the penalty, as i beg god and you to pardon me.", "no faithful subject ever rejoiced more at the discovery of most dangerous treason than i now rejoice that i was thwarted in a damnable undertaking. pardon my crime, sovereign, but not my person.", "may god in his mercy forgive you. this is your sentence. you have conspired against us with a proclaimed enemy and accepted his money in exchange for killing us. in doing so, you would have sold your king to slaughter, his princes and lords to slavery, his subjects to oppression and abuse, and his whole kingdom to ruin. i seek no revenge for myself, but so dearly do i hold the safety of my kingdom, which you sought to destroy, that you must be punished according to her laws. so go to your deaths, poor miserable wretches, the pain of which may merciful god give you the strength to endure. and may you truly regret your terrible crimes. take them away."], ["and now, my lords, off to france. this invasion will be as glorious to you as it is to me. i have no doubt that it will be a swift and successful war, since god so graciously exposed this dangerous plot. i'm now sure that every bump in the road has been removed. let's go forth, dear countrymen. our strength is god. let's get going. we're off to sea, banners flying. i'll be no king of england if i'm not also king of france."], ["please, sweet husband, let me come with you as far as the town of staines.", "no, because my manly heart is grieving. bardolph, be happy. nym, rouse your bragging spirits. boy, be brave. falstaff is dead, and we must mourn him.", "i wish i were with him, wherever he is in heaven or in hell.", "oh, no, he's surely not in hell. he's in , if any man ever went to arthur's bosom. he died as peacefully as a baby. he departed right between twelve and one, just as the tide was turning. for after i saw him fumbling with the sheets and playing with imaginary flowers and smiling at the ends of his fingers, i knew it was the end. his face was gaunt and he was babbling about green fields. \"now, now, sir john!\" i said. \"what's all this? cheer up!\" and he called out \"god, god, god!\" three or four times. to soothe him, i told him not to think of god, that i hoped it wasn't yet time to bother with such thoughts. so he asked me to put more blankets on his feet. i put my hand into the bed and felt his feet, and they were stone-cold. then i felt his legs, and they were stone-cold, and so i moved upward and upward, and his whole body was stone-cold.", "they say he cried out against sherry.", "yes, he did."], ["and women.", "no, he did not.", "yes, he did. he said they were devils incarnate.", "he could never bear carnation. it was a color he never did like.", "he once said the devil would get him because of women.", "he did touch on women a bit, but his body was aching with fever and he talked about the whore of babylon.", "don't you remember how he saw a flea land on bardolph's nose and said it was a black soul burning in hell?", "well, the that sustained that fire is gone. that's all the wealth i ever earned in his company.", "shall we get moving? the king will already have left southampton.", "come, let's be on our way. my love, let me kiss your lips. look after my goods and possessions. keep on your toes: the rule is \"cash down, no credit.\" trust no one. for oaths are as easily broken as straws, and men's faith crumbles like crackers, and you can only rely on what you can hold onto. let caution be your guide. go dry your eyes. brothers in arms, we're off to france like leeches, my boys: to suck, to suck, their very blood to suck!"], ["i've heard that's not the most nourishing food.", "kiss her soft mouth, and we'll be off.", "farewell, hostess.", "i can't kiss that's just how it is but farewell.", "be thrifty. and keep yourself hidden, i command you.", "farewell. adieu."], ["the english army is advancing on us at full strength. it is more important that we respond majestically than that we respond carefully. therefore the dukes of berri, bretagne, brabant, and orlans shall advance, and you, prince dauphin, will swiftly entrench and fortify our fortress towns with men of courage and the means to defend themselves. the king of england's approach is as forceful as a whirlpool. it is right for us to prepare like people who are afraid, as we've been taught by the given us by the deadly and underestimated english on our own soil.", "my most feared father, it is certainly appropriate for us to arm ourselves against the enemy, because even in peace time, when no war or conflict is at hand, a kingdom should not lose its edge, but always be ready with defenses, men, and training as though it expected a war. therefore, i agree that we should all go and inspect those french territories that are weak. let's do it with no show of anxiety no, with no more fear than if we'd heard that the english were busying themselves with folk dancing. because, my good king, england is so poorly led, her scepter so foolishly borne by a vain, silly, shallow, impulsive youth, that she's hardly a threat."], ["oh, please, prince dauphin! you are completely wrong about this king. talk to the ambassadors who've just come back: ask them how majestically he responded to their message, how well supplied he was with good advisors, how restrained in expressing his displeasure, and, moreover, how terrifyingly firm he was in his resolve. you'll discover that his youthful follies were like the persona that adopted to deceive tarquin cloaking wisdom in folly the way gardeners cover the most delicate roots with manure when they first sprout up.", "well, you're wrong, my lord high constable. but even if i thought you were right, it doesn't matter. when it comes to defense, it's best to assume that the enemy is more powerful than he seems. that way, we fill the gaps in our defenses. otherwise, if we do it on the cheap, we'll be like the miser who spoils his new coat by not buying quite enough cloth to make it.", "i think king harry is strong, so the rest of you princes make sure to arm yourselves to meet him with strength. his ancestors got their first taste of blood in battle with us, and he is born of that warlike strain that haunted us on our home ground. reflect on the battle of crcy, where, to our everlasting shame, all our princes were taken prisoner by the prince of wales, he whom they called edward the black prince. remember how his mountain-bred father, standing high on a mountain,"], ["crowned by the golden sun, observed his heroic son and smiled to see him mangle the work of nature, french youth whose fathers and god had nurtured for twenty years, since they were babies. this king is a branch of that same victorious stock. so let us be wary both of his inborn might and of his destiny.", "ambassadors of harry, king of england, request a hearing with your majesty.", "we'll see them immediately. bring them right in.", "notice, my friends, how closely this hunter follows his prey.", "turn and face them and you'll stop the pursuit. the cowardly pack barks loudest when the quarry is way out front. my good king, surprise the english and let them know what kind of kingdom you rule over. self-love, my liege, is not so great a sin as self-neglect.", "from our brother monarch, the king of england?", "yes, from him. thus he greets your majesty. he commands you, in the name of god: give up. relinquish the stolen titles that, by the gift of heaven and the laws"], ["of nature and of nations, belong to him and his heirs. that is, give up the crown and all the extensive titles that go with it, according to custom and long use. so that you'll know this is no dubious or farfetched claim, he sends you his family tree, every line of which supports the claim. look over this document, and when you see that he is directly descended from his most famous of famous ancestors, edward the third, he demands that you resign your crown and kingdom, which you wrongfully hold at the expense of himself, the true and natural owner.", "and what will happen if i don't?", "bloodshed will force you to. no matter how deeply you hid the crown, even if you hid it in your own hearts, he'd dig it up. that's why he's coming after you like a fierce storm, with thunder and earthquakes like could stir up. so, if asking you for the crown doesn't work, he will force you to give it to him. in the name of god, then, he asks that you deliver up the crown. he says to take pity on the poor souls whom this ravenous war will swallow up. the widows' tears, the orphans' cries, the dead men's blood, the girls mourning for their husbands, the fathers and the men they might have married will all be your fault. this is his claim, his threat, and my message. if the dauphin is here, i have a message for him, too."], ["i'll think it over. tomorrow, i'll let you know what i've decided and what answer you should deliver to the king of england.", "regarding the dauphin, you can speak to me. what's the message from the english king?", "scorn and defiance, indifference, contempt, and any insult that wouldn't disgrace the mighty sender that's the value he puts on you. and my king goes on: if your royal father does not sweeten the bitter insult you sent my king and grant all our demands, henry's artillery will give you so resounding an answer that the very caves and vaulted cathedrals of france shall echo your mocking of him back in your face.", "say this: if my father sends a friendly answer, it is against my will. i want nothing but conflict with england. to that end, i presented him with the tennis balls, the perfect expression of his inexperience and frivolity.", "he'll make your palace tremble for this insult, even if it were the mightiest in all of europe. and, make no mistake, you'll find, as we his subjects have, an amazing difference between the king as a young man and the way he is now. now he uses his time wisely, as you will see by your own casualties, if he remains in france.", "we'll give you an answer tomorrow."], ["don't take too long, unless you want our king to come after me to ask what's holding things up, because he's already landed here.", "you'll have your answer soon. a night isn't much time for addressing matters of this importance."], ["and so, on the wings of imagination and at the speed of thought, our scene flies swiftly on. imagine that you have seen the well-equipped king at dover pier set sail in full royal regalia and his noble fleet fan the rising sun with its silken banners. give your imagination free rein. picture the cabin boys climbing around the rigging. hear the shrill whistle that brings order to the hubbub. picture the linen sails driven by the invisible and subtle wind as they pull the vast hulls through the wrinkled sea, breasting the high waves. pretend that you're standing on the shore, watching a city dance on the shifting waves, and you'll have an idea of the look of this majestic fleet as it holds a straight course for harfleur. follow it, follow it! hitch your minds to this navy's sterns and leave your england, silent as midnight, guarded by grandfathers, babies, and old women. for what male subject is there old enough for his chin to be graced with even one hair who doesn't want to follow this select band of hand-picked knights to france? once there, make your thoughts work harder, and witness a siege. take in the wheeled canons with their deadly gaping mouths trained on the walled city of harfleur. imagine the french ambassador returning to inform harry that the king offers him"], ["his daughter, katherine, with some insignificant, unprofitable dukedoms as her dowry. the offer doesn't go over well, and the nimble gunner now moves to ignite the devilish canon.", "down goes everything in their path. indulge us further and supplement our performance with your own imaginings."], ["attack the breach in the city wall once more, dear friends, attack it once more or else let's close it up with english corpses. in peacetime, nothing looks better in a man than restraint and humility. but when the battle trumpet blows in our ears, then it's time to act like the tiger. with muscles taut and blood stirred up, hide your civilized nature under the guise of ugly rage. lend your eyes a terrifying gleam and let them jut out from the portholes of the head like brass cannon. make your brow jut out over your eyes like a frightening cliff over the wild and desolate ocean. now grit your teeth and let your nostrils flare. take a deep breath and draw on every impulse to its fullest strength. on, on, you noblest englishmen, descended as you are from battle-tested fathers, fathers who, like so many alexander the greats, have fought in these regions from morning until night, sheathing their swords only when there was no one left to fight. don't dishonor your mothers! prove that the men you call your fathers did truly conceive you. serve as an example to men of common birth and teach them how to fight. and you, good farmers, whose limbs were made in england, show us here the vigor of your upbringing. prove you are worthy of your birth, which i do not doubt for a moment. for there isn't one of you so low-born that your eyes don't shine with noble luster. i see you're standing like greyhounds"], ["on a leash, straining for the moment when you'll be let loose. the hunt is on! follow your spirit, and as you charge cry, \"god for harry, england, and saint george!\""], ["on, on, on, on, on! to the breach, to the breach!", "please, corporal, stop! the fighting is too violent. speaking for myself, i only have one life, not dozens. too violent! that's just how it is, the plain truth of it.", "the plain truth doesn't lie. you can see how it is all around. fighting comes and goes, god's loyal servants drop and die.", "i wish i were in an alehouse in london! i would give all my glory for a mug of ale and safety.", "me too.", "", "up to the breach, you dogs! go! get a move on, you scrotems!"], ["great duke, be merciful to mortal men. calm your rage, your manly rage! calm your rage, great duke! dear man, calm your rage. be lenient, dearest!", "this is healthy talk. your honor's is unhealthy talk.", "young though i am, i've been observing these three blowhards closely. i am \"man\" which is to say, servant to all three of them. yet not one among them, if all three were to wait on me, could be my \"man,\" because three such fakes don't amount to a man. take bardolph: he is cowardly and blustery. he acts tough, but he doesn't fight. pistol, meanwhile, has a lethal tongue but an inert sword. he destroys words but keeps his weapon in one piece. as for nym, he's heard men of valor are men of few words, so he refuses to pray lest he should be thought a coward. but he has as few good deeds as he has bad words for he never cracked anyone's head but his own, and that was against a post when he was drunk. they will steal anything and call it spoils. bardolph stole a lute case, carried it for thirty-six miles, and sold it for a penny and a half. nym and bardolph are sworn brothers in crime, and in calais they stole a fire shovel: i could see from that that they had no pride. they would like me to be as familiar with men's pockets as their gloves and handkerchiefs, which goes against my manhood, because to take something from another's pocket and put it into my own is plain stealing. i must leave them and seek some better employment. their villainy nauseates me, and i must therefore vomit it up."], ["captain fluellen, you must come straight to the tunnels. the duke of gloucester wants a word with you.", "the tunnels! tell the duke i'm not so keen to come to the tunnels. for the tunnels, see, are not strictly in accordance with the proper practice of war. they're not deep enough. for the enemy, see and you can explain this to the duke, see has dug its own tunnels four yards below ours. by jesus, i think they will blow up everything if we don't improve our tactics.", "the duke of gloucester, who has command over the siege, is in consultation with an irishman, a very valiant gentleman indeed.", "it's captain macmorris, right?", "i think so.", "jesus, he's an ass if there ever was one! i will say as much to his face. he knows no more about the proper practice of war, see the ancient practices than a puppy.", "here he comes with captain jamy, the scots captain."], ["captain jamy is a wonderfully valorous gentleman, that's certain, one with great learning and knowledge concerning ancient warfare, i happen to know from his maneuvers. by jesus, he will defend his position on the practices of the ancient roman wars as well as any military man in the world.", "good day to you, captain fluellen.", "good evening to your worship, good captain james.", "tell me, captain macmorris, have you left the tunnels? have the excavators stopped work?", "christ, it's a disaster. the work is stopped, the trumpet has sounded the retreat. i swear by this hand and my father's soul, the whole thing is a disaster. it's all stopped. i could have blown up the town in an hour. oh, it's a disaster, a disaster, by this hand, it's a disaster.", "captain macmorris, i beg your pardon, but would you grant me a discussion or two with you, see, partly touching on or concerning the practice of war, the roman wars, for the sake of argument, see, and friendly conversation? partly to confirm my opinion and partly for the satisfaction, see, of my mind, with respect to the demands of proper military practice that's the point?", "oh, this is fine, good captains. and i'll answer you, if i may, when i get a chance. indeed i will."], ["this is no time to have a discussion. christ! the day is hot and between the weather and the wars and the king and the dukes, it's no time for a discussion. the town is besieged, and the trumpet calls us to the gap, and we talk and do nothing, by christ. it's a disgrace to us all. god save me, it's a disgrace, by this hand, when there are throats to be cut and work to be done, and nothing gets done, christ save me.", "i swear by the mass, before i close my eyes to go to sleep, i'll put in some good fighting, or i'll lie in the ground dead. and i'll kill as valiantly as i can, that's for sure. that is the long and the short of it. but truly, i would love to hear the two of you discuss warfare.", "captain macmorris, i think, see correct me if i'm wrong there are not many of your nation", "my nation? what is my nation? it's a villain and a bastard and a coward and a rascal. what is my nation? who talks of my nation?", "captain macmorris, if you take my words in some way other than how they were meant, see, i'll have to think you're not treating me with the good will you ought to, see, since i am as good a man as yourself, both in the practice of war and in my country of origin and in other respects.", "i do not know that you are as good a man as myself. so, by christ, i'll cut off your head.", "now, now, both of you gentlemen! you go out of your way to misunderstand each other."], ["yes, and that's a serious failing.", "the town is asking for a pause in the fighting for negotiation.", "captain macmorris, when we have more leisure, see, i will be so bold as to show you i know about the practice of warfare, and that's that."], ["what has the governor of the town decided? this is the final discussion i will grant. so submit to my mercy or, like men who revel in their own destruction, challenge me to do my worst. for, as i am a soldier, the name i think suits me best, once i begin my attack on harfleur again, i will not leave the half-conquered town until she lies buried in her own ashes. the gates of mercy will be closed by then, and harsh and hard-hearted soldiers, who have tasted blood, will have free reign to commit whatever violence they want, mowing down your lovely young virgins and budding infants. what will it matter to me, since you will have brought it on yourselves, if sacrilegious war, dressed in red like satan, his face blackened by smoke, should commit every form of savage destruction and ruin? what will it matter to me if your innocent maidens are raped, since you will have asked for it? what power can rein in promiscuous evil once it's gotten rolling? we might as well send orders to the whale to come ashore as try to restore order in soldiers carried away with their looting. therefore, you men of harfleur, take pity on your town and on your people while i still have control over my men, while the cool and moderate winds of mercy still have power to disperse the depraved, infected clouds of murder, plunder, and crazed soldiers defile your shrieking daughters with their foul hands, and your fathers dragged by their silver beards, their reverend heads dashed against the walls. expect to see your naked babies skewered upon pikes while their"], ["grief-crazed mothers tear the clouds with their loud cries, just as the women of judea did when herod slaughtered their infants. what do you say? will you surrender and avoid all this or be called to account for the destruction of this town?", "today our hopes are at an end. the dauphin, whom we asked for reinforcements, sends back the answer that he's not yet in a position to raise so great an army. therefore, great king, we surrender our town and lives to your kind mercy. enter our gates and do as you like with us and our possessions, for we cannot defend ourselves any longer.", "open your gates.", "come, uncle exeter, enter harfleur. stay there and fortify it well against the french. deal with them all mercifully on my behalf, dear uncle. meanwhile, with winter coming on and sickness growing among our troops, we'll withdraw to calais. tonight in harfleur we will be your guest; tomorrow we'll march on."], ["alice, you have been to england and you know the language.", "a little, madam.", "please teach me english. i must learn to speak it. what is the word for in english?", "? that is \"de hand.\"", "\"de hand.\" and", "? good lord, i forget but it will come to me. the word for i believe, is \"de fangres.\" yes, \"de fangres.\"", "\"de hand\"; \"de fangres.\" i think i am a very apt student! i have learned two words of english already. what is the word for", "that is \"de nails.\"", "\"de nails.\" listen! tell me if i'm saying it right. de hand, de fangres, et de nails.\"", "well done, madam. excellent english.", "tell me the english for", "\"de arm,\" madam."], ["and", "\"d'elbow.\"", "\"d'elbow.\" let me practice all the words you've taught me so far.", "it's too difficult, i think, madam.", "i beg to differ, alice. listen: \"de hand, de fangres, de nails, d'arma, de bilbow.\"", "\"d'elbow,\" madam.", "oh, lord, i forgot! \"d'elbow.\" what is the word for", "\"de neck,\" madam.", "\"de nick.\" and", "\"de chin.\"", "\"de nick\"; \"de sin.\"", "yes. if i may say so, your highness pronounces the words just like a native english speaker.", "i have no doubt i'll learn it, and in a short time, too god willing.", "you haven't forgotten what you just learned?"], ["no, i'll recite it for you right now: \"de hand, de fangres, de nails \"", "\"de nails,\" madame.", "\"de nails, de arme, de ilbow.\"", "forgive me, de bow.", "that's what i said, \"de elbow, de nick, et de sin.\" what are the words for and", "\"de foot,\" madame, and \" .\"", "\"de foot\" and \"de count\"! oh, lord, those are vulgar words wicked, ugly, immodest, not fitting for respectable girls to speak. i would not utter those words in the presence of the lords of france for all the world. ugh! \"le foot\" and \"le count\"! nevertheless, i will recite my lesson one more time all together: \"de hand, de fangres, de nails, de arm, de elbow, de nick, de sin, , de coun.\"", "that is excellent, madame!", "that's enough for one lesson. let's go to lunch."], ["he's certainly crossed the river somme.", "and if he advances unopposed, my lord, let us abandon france. let us leave everything and give our vineyards to the barbarous nation.", "god alive! shall a few offshoots of our nation, born of our father's lust our branches grafted to wild and savage trunks grow to such a height that they look down with contempt on the plants from which they first ?", "normans, nothing more than bastard normans, norman bastards! i hope i die! if they march along unopposed, i will sell my dukedom for a sodden, filthy farm in that craggy isle of albion.", "god of battles! where do they get this spirit? isn't their climate foggy, cold, and dark? doesn't the sun shine palely down on them, as though in contempt, killing their fruit with frowns? can boiled water (beer, they call it) a drink for broken-down horses, heat their cold blood to such a valiant level? and shall our lively blood, quickened by wine, be so frosty? oh, for the"], ["honor of our land, let us not hang like ropes of icicles off the thatched roofs of our houses while men of a more frosty temperament sweat off their own gallant youth in our rich fields! our fields may be rich, but they are ruled poorly.", "by faith and honor, our wives mock us, telling us brazenly that our vigor has been so bred out of us that they plan to give their bodies to the lusty youth of england to resupply france with men who, though bastards, will at least be warriors.", "they tell us we'd be better off in english dancing schools, where we could teach the latest dances, as our grace is all in our heels; we are no better than high-class deserters.", "where is montjoy, the herald? send him on his way quickly. tell him to greet the king of england with our sharp defiance. rise, princes, and, with a spirit of honor more sharply edged than your swords, rush to the battlefield: charles delabreth, high constable of france; you dukes of orlans, bourbon, berri, alenon, brabant, bar, and burgundy; jaques chatillon, rambures, vaudemont, beaumont, grandpr, roussi, and fauconberg, foix, lestrale, bouciqualt, and charolois. high dukes, great princes, barons, lords and knights for the sake of the great positions you hold, rid yourselves of this great shame. stop harry of england, who is now sweeping through our land with banners drenched in the french blood he spilled at harfleur. rush on his army the way the melting snow of the alps spits on the low valleys below them. descend on him: you have power enough. and bring him into rouen as our prisoner."], ["now that's a mission worthy of great men! i'm only sorry that his numbers are so few and those men he has sick and starving on the march. when he sees our army, i'm sure his heart will sink with fear and he'll offer us a large sum in exchange for avoiding battleof.", "have montjoy hurry, then, lord constable, and have him ask the king of england what he is willing to pay us to get out of the war. prince dauphin, you'll stay with me in rouen.", "no, please, i beg your majesty.", "be patient, because you're staying with me. go now, lord constable and all you princes, and quickly bring us news of england's defeat."], ["greetings, captain fluellen! have you just come from the bridge?", "i assure you, there are some excellent military operations being carried out at the bridge.", "is the duke of exeter safe?", "the duke of exeter is as courageous as and a man whom i love and honor deeply, with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my life, and my livelihood, to the very utmost of my being. he is not god be praised and blessed hurt in any way but is holding the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. there is a standard-bearer there at the bridge. i truly think he is as valiant a man as mark antony. he is a man of no rank or consequence, but i saw him fight as gallantly as though he were.", "what is his name?", "he is called ensign pistol.", "i don't know him.", "here he is."], ["captain, i have a favor to beg of you. you're on very good terms with the duke of exeter.", "yes, god be praised, i have managed to earn his favor.", "bardolph, a soldier who is loyal and stout-hearted and full of valour, has, by a cruel trick of fate and a turn of silly fortune's wildly spinning wheel, that blind goddess who stands upon an ever-rolling stone", "now, now, ensign pistol. fortune is depicted as blind, with a scarf over her eyes, to signify that she is blind. and she is depicted with a wheel to signify this is the point that she is turning and inconstant, and all about change and variation. and her foot, see, is planted on a spherical stone that rolls and rolls and rolls. truly, artists do wonderful things with the image of fortune. she provides an excellent moral.", "fortune is bardolph's enemy. she frowns on him, for he has stolen a from a church and he must be hanged. a damnable death! it's fine for dogs to be hung, but men should go free and not have their windpipes strangled with hemp. but exeter has pronounced a death sentence and for a cheap little pax. therefore, go and speak for him! the duke will listen to you. don't let bardolph's life be brought to an end by a length of cheap rope and with this shame. save his life, captain, and i will repay you.", "ensign pistol, i think i understand you.", "i'm glad to hear it."], ["actually, you shouldn't be, because, see, even if he were my own brother i'd want the duke to stick to his plan and have bardolph executed. discipline must be kept.", "then die and be damned! and i'm giving the finger to your friendship!", "very well.", "and the to you!", "very good.", "why, that man is a total fraud and rascal. i remember him now. a pimp, a pickpocket.", "at the bridge he spoke as excellently as anyone i've ever heard, i promise you. but that's alright. what he just said to me it's alright. i assure you, when the time comes", "why, he's a fool, an idiot, a moron, a man who now and then joins the army so as to be able to give himself airs when he gets back to london and masquerades as a soldier. such fellows have memorized the names of famous commanders, and they can tell you having learned such things by rote, not by experience where this or that battle was fought, at such and such fort, at such and such wall, with such and such protective escort. and they can say who fought well, who was"], ["shot, who was disgraced, what terms the enemy insisted on. and they study how to express these things in proper military jargon, which they embellish with fashionable oaths. and what a beard trimmed like the general's or a rough uniform will do among foaming mugs and brains washed with ale, you wouldn't believe. but you must learn to recognize such liars, or you will be greatly taken advantage of.", "i tell you what, captain gower; i perceive that he is not the man that he would have the world think he is. if i find an opportunity, i will give him a piece of my mind.", "listen. the king is coming, and i must speak with him about what went on at the bridge. god bless your majesty!", "tell me, fluellen: did you just come from the bridge?", "yes, your majesty. the duke of exeter has held the bridge very gallantly. the french have retreated, see, and there were great acts of courage. indeed, the enemy nearly took the bridge, but he was forced to retreat, and the duke of exeter holds the bridge. i can tell your majesty, the duke is a brave man.", "what men have you lost, fluellen?", "the enemy's losses have been very great, pretty substantial. to tell the truth, though, i think the duke hasn't lost a single man, except for one who will probably be executed for robbing a church, one bardolph i don't know if your majesty knows the man. his face is all pustules and pockmarks, and pimples and inflammation, and his lips blow up toward his nose, which is like a red-hot coal, sometimes blue, sometimes red. but his nose is dead, and the fire's put out."], ["i want all such offenders to be dealt with that way, and i give precise orders that in our progress through the country there shall be nothing seized from the villages, nothing taken that is not paid for, none of the french harassed or abused in disrespectful language. for when mercy and cruelty compete for a kingdom, the gentler player is bound to win.", "you know from my clothing who i am.", "well then, i know who you are. what do you have to tell me?", "my master's decision.", "go ahead.", "my king says this: \"tell harry of england: though we appeared dead, we were only asleep. strategy makes a better soldier than haste. tell him we could have driven him back at harfleur but thought it unwise to burst a pustule before it had fully ripened. now the time is right for us to speak, and we do so with imperial authority. the king of england will regret his foolishness, discover his weakness, and marvel at our restraint. tell him therefore to consider what ransom he can offer as a prisoner of war. it must be commensurate with the losses we have suffered, the subjects we"], ["have lost, and the indignity we have endured, for which he is too insignificant to sufficiently pay us back. his coffers are too poor to atone for our losses, his entire kingdom too small to account for the amount of blood we've shed, and the sight of him kneeling at our feet an empty satisfaction compared to the indignity we have put up with. add defiance to all this and, by way of conclusion, tell him that he has betrayed the men who follow him, whose death sentence has been pronounced.\" my king and master's message delivered, my task is done.", "what is your name? i know your position.", "montjoy.", "you do your job well. go back and tell your king i do not seek an encounter with him now but would be willing to march on to calais without interference, for to be honest, though it's probably unwise to confess this to a powerful enemy who has the advantage my men are considerably weakened by illness, my numbers reduced, and those few men i have almost no better than so many frenchmen, though when they were in good form, i tell you, herald, i thought three frenchmen walked on every pair of english legs. but god forgive me for bragging. it's a vice i've picked up since i've been here, and i must get rid of it. anyway, go tell your master i am here. my ransom is my own fragile, worthless body, my army but a weak and sickly escort. but, before god, tell him we will advance, even if the king of france himself and another foe as strong should stand in our way. that's for your trouble, montjoy. go tell your master to consider carefully. if we're allowed to pass, we will. if we're prevented, we'll discolor your golden ground with your red blood. and so, montjoy, farewell. this is our whole answer: we do not seek a battle nor will we avoid one. tell your master this."], ["i'll deliver the message. i thank your highness.", "i hope they don't attack us now.", "we're in god's hands, brother, not in theirs. march to the bridge. night is approaching. we'll set up camp across the river and continue on tomorrow. give the order to march."], ["nonsense. i have the best armor in the world. i wish it were day!", "you have wonderful armor, but give my horse his due.", "it is the best horse in europe.", "will it never be morning?", "my lord of orlans, and my lord high constable, are you talking about horses and armor?", "you are as well provided in both respects as any prince in the world.", "what a long night this is! i will not trade my horse for any that walks on four legs. he leaps from the ground as if his insides were light as hairs. he's a flying horse, a pegasus, breathing fire out of his nostrils. when i sit astride him, i soar, i am a hawk. he trots on air. the earth sings when he touches it. the lowest part of his hoof is more musical than pan's pipe.", "he's the color of nutmeg.", "and hot as ginger. he is an animal worthy of perseus. he is pure air and fire. the duller elements of earth and water have no part in him, except in the moment of patient stillness when his rider mounts him. he is indeed worthy of the name \"horse,\" and you can call all the rest beasts."], ["indeed, my lord, he is a perfectly wonderful horse.", "he is the prince of horses. his neigh is like a monarch's command. his face demands respect.", "enough, cousin.", "no, the man who cannot extol the virtues of my horse from dawn to dusk is not particularly clever. it's a subject as worthy of endless discussion as the changing sea. if each grain of sand had a tongue to eulogize, my horse would be a topic for them all. he is a subject for a king to contemplate, and for a king's king to ride on, and for the world at large both friend and stranger to stop whatever they are doing and marvel at. i once wrote a sonnet in his praise which began, \"wonder of nature \"", "i have heard a sonnet to one's mistress that began like that.", "then the writer imitated the one i composed to my steed, for my horse is my mistress.", "your mistress is a good mount.", "a good mount for me and that's the highest praise and very definition of a good mistress, that she belong to one alone.", "yes, but yesterday i could have sworn your mistress gave you a bumpy ride.", "so, perhaps, did yours."], ["mine wasn't wearing a bridle.", "oh, then i guess she was old and gentle, and you rode barelegged, like an irish yokel.", "you're a good judge of horsemanship.", "take a tip from me, then. those who don't take care when they ride often find themselves thrown into a messy situation. i'd rather have my horse than a mistress.", "i'd prefer to keep my mistress rather than some lame horse.", "i'll tell you this, constable, my mistress has his own hair.", "i could make the same boast even if i had a pig as my mistress.", "\"the dog returns to its own vomit, and the newly washed sow to its mud puddle.\" you'd take anything for a mistress.", "at least i don't have a horse for my mistress or a saying so beside the point.", "my lord constable, are those stars or suns i saw on the armor in your tent tonight?", "stars, my lord.", "i hope some will fall off tomorrow."], ["and yet i'll still have plenty.", "no doubt, for you wear too many in the first place, and it might be more seemly to make do with fewer.", "yes, like your horse, who, staggering under your boasts, would trot more easily if some of them dismounted.", "i only wish i could load him up with all the praise he deserves! oh, will it never be day? i will ride out a mile tomorrow and leave the road paved with the faces of dead englishmen.", "i'd say the same thing, but i'm afraid i'd be faced out of my way. but i do wish it were , for i long to be mixing it up with the english.", "would anyone like to twenty prisoners with me?", "you'll have to take some chances yourself before you catch them."], ["it's midnight. i'll go put my armor on.", "the dauphin really wants it to be morning.", "he wants to eat the english.", "i think he'll everyone he kills.", "by my mistress's white hand, he's a gallant prince.", "swear by her foot, so she can stamp out the oath.", "he's definitely the most active gentleman of france.", "performing is activity, and he is always doing that.", "he never did harm that i heard of.", "and he's not going to do any tomorrow. that part of his reputation will stand.", "i know him to be valiant.", "i was told that by one who knows him better than you.", "who was that?", "why, he told me so himself, and he said he didn't care who knew it.", "he doesn't have to care. his virtue is not hidden."], ["oh, but it is, sir. no one but his valet ever saw it. his courage is hidden, and when it is revealed, it will shrink.", "ill will never prompted anything well said.", "i'll challenge that proverb with one of my own: \"there is flattery in friendship.\"", "and i'll match that with \"give the devil his due.\"", "very apt! your friend is equated with the devil. i'll go straight for that proverb with \"to hell with the devil.\"", "you are better at proverbs than i am by as much as \"a fool shoots quickly and overshoots his mark.\"", "you have overshot.", "i've outshot you, and not for the first time.", "my lord high constable, the english lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents.", "who measured the ground?", "the lord grandpr.", "a very valiant and knowledgeable gentleman. if only it were day! poor harry of england! he doesn't long for the dawn as we do."], ["what a miserable and obstinate fellow this king of england is, to blunder with his fat-headed followers so far beyond his capacity.", "if the english had any sense, they would run away.", "well, obviously they don't. if there were anything inside their heads, they could never wear such heavy helmets.", "that island of england breeds very valiant creatures. their hounds are unequaled in courage.", "foolish dogs, blindly running straight toward a russian bear only to have their heads crushed like rotten apples. you might just as well say, \"that's a valiant flea that dares to eat its breakfast on the lip of a lion.\"", "yes, exactly. and the men resemble their english hounds in their loud, showy ferocity, too, leaving their brains behind with their wives. give them hefty meals of beef and iron and steel, and they will eat like wolves and fight like devils.", "yes, but these english are seriously short of beef.", "then tomorrow we'll find that they feel only like eating, not like fighting. it's time to put our armor on. shall we get started?", "it's two o'clock now. but let me see, by ten we shall each have captured a hundred englishmen."], ["now summon up the image of stealthy murmurs and engulfing darkness filling the wide vessel of the universe. from camp to camp through the dark cave of night, the noise from both armies grows so quiet that those standing watch almost think they can hear the whispered secrets of one another's sentinels. one by one, fires are lit on both sides, and through their pale flames, each army thinks he sees the smoke-tinged faces of the other. the horses of each army answer one another's proud, threatening neighs as they pierce the dull night, and from the tents the sound of the blacksmiths' hammers as they fit out the knights, closing rivets up, adds a note of fear to the preparations. the country cocks crow and the clocks toll, sounding a drowsy three o'clock in the morning. proud of their army and secure in their numbers, the confident and overeager french play dice, betting on how many worthless englishmen each will capture. they scold the limping, slowly moving night, which, like an ugly old woman, takes so long to pass. the poor doomed english, like sacrificial beasts, sit patiently, and privately contemplate the dangers that will arrive with morning. with their grave faces, emaciated cheeks, and war-torn coats, they seem to the gazing moon like so many horrifying ghosts. now, whoever spots the royal captain of this ruined army walking from camp to camp, from tent to tent, let him cry \"praise and glory on his head!\" for out he goes visiting all his troops. he bids them good morning with a modest smile and calls"], ["them brothers, friends, and countrymen. there is no indication of the mighty army that surrounds them in his expression, nor has the long, sleepless night robbed his face of an ounce of color. instead, he looks fresh and covers any signs of fatigue with a show of cheerfulness and sweet majesty that every sad and pale wretch takes comfort in when they see him. his generous eye notices everyone, doling out a bounty as far-reaching as the sun, thawing cold fear, so that low and well-born alike may all experience (for want of a better way of putting it) a little touch of harry in the night. with that, our scene rushes on toward the battle, which we will represent with four or five worn-out fencing foils, a travesty of battle forgive us! that disgraces the name of agincourt. still, stay to watch, imagining the way it really was from our own inadequate imitation."], ["gloucester, it's true that we are in great danger. but our courage should only be the greater for that. good morning, brother bedford. god almighty, there must be some essential goodness even in evil, if men would only look for it. in our case, our bad neighbors over their make us early risers, a healthy and sensible thing to be. besides, they act as outward consciences and preachers to us all, a visible reminder that we should prepare ourselves for death. think like that, and you'll manage to get honey out of a common weed and find a moral lesson in the devil himself.", "good morning, old sir thomas erpingham! a nice, soft pillow would be a more suitable place to lay that good white head than france's hard, cold ground.", "not at all, my liege. i prefer these quarters, since they allow me to say, \"now i live like a king.\"", "it's good for men to be given an example of how to take pleasure in discomfort. it eases the spirit. and when the mind is engaged, the rest of the body, dead and dull before, wakes up and comes to life with a new nimbleness and sensitivity, like a snake shedding its dead skin. lend me your cloak, sir thomas. brothers, give my regards to the princes in our camp. say good day to them from me and ask them to come to my tent."], ["we shall, my liege.", "shall i accompany your grace?", "no, my good knight. go with my brothers to my english peers. i need to be alone with my thoughts for a while and don't want any company.", "the lord in heaven bless you, noble harry!", "bless you, old soul! your words cheer my heart.", "( ) who goes there?", "a friend.", "declare yourself to me. are you an officer? or are you low, vulgar, and of the common people?", "i am a gentleman of a company.", "do you carry a pike?", "exactly. what about you?", "i'm as good a gentleman as the emperor."], ["then you're a better man than the king.", "the king's a dear boy with a heart of gold, he's a lively lad, a wag, born of fine parents, good with his fists. i kiss his dirty shoe, and from the bottom of my heart i love the lovely boy. what is your name?", "harry le roy.", "le roy? that's a cornish name. are you with a cornish company?", "no, i am a welshman.", "do you know fluellen?", "yes.", "tell him i'll take the leek out of his hat on saint davy's day and slap his head with it.", "you'd better not wear your dagger in your cap that day, or he might slap your head with it.", "are you his friend?", "yes, and his relative, too.", "then i'm giving you the finger.", "thank you. god be with you.", "my name is pistol."], ["the name suits your fierceness.", "captain fluellen!", "in the name of jesus christ, keep it down! it never ceases to amaze me the way people ignore the correct, traditional principles and rules of war. if you would take the trouble to study the tactics of pompey the great, i can tell you that you would find no tittle-tattle or pibble-pabble in pompey's camp. i tell you, you would find the rituals of war and, i promise you, its ceremonies and its solicitudes and its forms and its gravity and its discipline all to be quite counter to all this noise.", "but the enemy is loud. you can hear them all night long.", "and if the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating idiot, does that mean, you think, that we should also be an ass and a fool and a prating idiot? think about it.", "i will lower my voice.", "i'd be very glad if you would.", "though he seems a little old-fashioned, there is much care and courage in this welshman."], ["brother john bates, isn't that dawn breaking over there?", "i think it is. but we have no great reason to long for day.", "that's the beginning of the day we see, but i don't think we'll see the end of it. who goes there?", "a friend.", "what captain do you serve?", "sir thomas erpingham.", "a veteran commander and a very kind gentleman. tell me, what does he think of our situation?", "we're men beached on the sand, hoping to be washed out by the next tide.", "he hasn't told this to the king, has he?", "no, nor would it be right for him to. though it's not my place to say so, i think the king is, after all, only a man, the same as me. the violet smells to him the same as it does to me. the sky appears to him much as it does to me, and all his senses are those of a mortal man. without his fine clothes, the king appears just like any other naked man. and though his feelings may be pitched higher than ours, when they plummet, they plummet that much farther. therefore, when he has reason to fear, as we do, his fears are without question of the same order. still, it stands to reason that he mustn't betray his fear, as it might dishearten his army."], ["he can act as brave as he wants, but i believe on a cold night like this he wishes he were neck-deep in the thames, and i wish he were, too, and i with him, whatever the danger, so long as we were far away from here.", "i'll tell you truly what i think about the king in my heart. i don't think he wants to be anywhere but where he is.", "then i wish he were here alone. he'd be sure to be ransomed, and many a poor man's life saved.", "oh, i'm sure you don't dislike him so much as to wish he were here alone, even though you say this to find out how the rest of us feel. i don't think there's anywhere i'd rather die than in the king's company, as his cause is just and honorable.", "that's more than we know.", "yes, and more than we should seek to know. it's enough that we know we're the king's subjects. if his cause is wrong, our obedience to the king clears us of responsibility for it.", "but if the cause is not just, the king himself will have a lot to answer for, when all those legs and arms and heads chopped off in battle shall join together on judgment day crying, \"we died at such and such a place.\" some will be swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some for the wives that are destitute without them, some about the debts they owed, some for their children left unprovided for. i think few die well who die in battle. how can a person expect to resolve anything in a christian manner when they've passed their lives killing? now, if these men don't die in a state of grace, it will be a heavy charge against the king who led them into battle, whom they, as his subjects, could not disobey."], ["the king isn't responsible for the particular end each soldier comes to, nor is the father responsible for his son's final end or the master for his servant's. the father and the master and the king didn't order their subordinates' deaths when they ordered their services. besides, there's no king, however pure his cause, who, if it comes to a trial by combat, can rely on using completely blameless soldiers. perhaps some may be guilty of plotting murder, some of seducing maidens with lies and then abandoning them; some, of looting and stealing before they were even hired as soldiers. even if these men have escaped the law and punishment at home, they cannot escape god. war is god's agent of justice. war is vengeance. so there are men here who have broken the king's law earlier and are punished now in his war. when they feared death, they escaped with their lives; and now where they imagine they're safe, they perish. so, if they die unprepared, the king is no more guilty of their damnation than he was guilty of the earlier crimes they're finally being punished for. every subject's duty is the king's, but every subject's soul is his own. therefore, every soldier should do as any man who is sick in his bed would do: clear his conscience of any stain. then if he dies, his death serves him. or, if he doesn't die, the time he spent preparing himself was at least blessed. and in the case of the man who survives, one could be forgiven for supposing that god spared him exactly because he was so ready to die; now he can live to appreciate god's greatness and teach others to prepare.by this reasoning, if a son is sent by his father on business and drowns at sea while still in a state of sin, his wickedness is his father's fault. or if a servant, carrying a sum of money for his master, is attacked by robbers and dies without confessing his sins, we can say that the master's business is to blame for the servant's damnation. but that isn't so."], ["it's clear, every man must take responsibility for the manner of his own death. the king is not responsible for it.", "i don't expect him to answer for me, and yet i'm determined to fight vigorously for him.", "i myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.", "sure, he said so to make us fight cheerfully. but when our throats are cut, he could be ransomed without our being any the wiser.", "if i live to see it, i'll never trust his word again.", "yeah, right, go get him. that's a lame threat from a toy gun, a poor individual's private displeasure with a monarch. you may as well try to turn the sun to ice by fanning its face with a peacock feather. you'll \"never trust his word again.\" come on, that was a stupid thing to say.", "your scolding is somewhat overblown. i'd be angry with you if the occasion allowed.", "let it be a quarrel between us, if you live."], ["i'm game.", "how will i recognize you in the future?", "give me some trinket of yours, and i will wear it in my hat. then, if you dare to acknowledge it, i'll take up my quarrel with you.", "here's my glove; give me one of yours.", "here.", "i'll also wear this in my cap. if you come to me after tomorrow and say, \"that's my glove,\" i swear by this hand, i will take it and give you a box on the ear.", "if i ever see it, i will challenge you.", "you may as well undertake to be hanged.", "i'll do it even if i find you in the company of the king himself.", "keep your word. farewell.", "be friends, you english fools, be friends: we have enough enemies on the french side, if either of you could count.", "indeed, the french can bet twenty french crowns to one that they'll beat us, they have such an army. but it's no treason for an englishman to cut off a french crown a head, i mean and tomorrow the king himself will do some snipping."], ["upon the king! \"let's lay everything upon the king: our lives, our souls, our debts, our anxious wives, our children, and our sins.\" i must bear responsibility for all of it. what a painful condition responsibility is. it goes along with being born to greatness, but it makes you get badmouthed by every fool who only has his own suffering to care about. what infinite peace do king's give up that private men enjoy? what do kings have that private men do not, besides the pomp of their position? and what is this useless ceremony of kings? what kind of god is ceremony, which suffers more than its worshippers do? what income, what profit does it bring in? oh, ceremony, only show me your value! why are you adored? do you amount to anything besides position, status, and ritual, which inspire awe and fear in others? you're less happy, being feared, than they are in fearing you. what do you get to drink, instead of sweet obedience, but poisonous flattery? try being sick, great greatness, and see if ceremony can cure you! do you think fiery fever can be put out by the windy puff of titles? will it be chased away by bowing and scraping? you can command a beggar to bow on bended knee, but can you take possession of his health? no, vain illusion, so intricately bound up with a king's rest. i who understand you, gorgeous ceremony, because i'm a and i know that neither the balm, the scepter, and the ball, the robe layered in gold and pearls, the fancy title that precedes the king, the throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp that beats upon the high shore of this world not all of these put together, not all of these laid down at night in an imperial bed, can cause the king to rest so soundly as does the miserable wretch who turns in at night with a full stomach and an empty mind, fed on the bread of his daily struggle. he never wakes to horrifying darkness, born of hell, but sweats in the hot sun from dawn to"], ["dusk and all night long sleeps in peace. come morning, he wakes and helps the sun into his chariot and so wears out the ever-rolling years until his death. apart from ceremony, this poor creature who spends his days in toil and his nights in sleep is better off than the king. the peasant enjoys his country's peace without ever worrying his dull head about the vigil the king must keep to maintain that peace.", "my lord, your noble subjects are looking for you all over the camp. they're anxious to see you.", "good old knight, gather them all together at my tent. i'll meet you there.", "consider it done, my lord."], ["oh god of battles, bolster my soldiers' courage. don't let them know fear. rob them of the ability to count before the numbers against them overwhelm their courage. and just for today, oh, lord, just today don't think of the crime my father committed in seizing the crown! i've transferred richard's body to a new grave and on it poured more tears of remorse than it has shed drops of blood. i've hired five hundred almsmen to hold up their withered hands to heaven, praying for my pardon twice a day throughout the year. and i've built two chapels where solemn priests sing continually for richard's soul. i will do more, though nothing i can do is any good since this remorse comes after the crime, asking for pardon.", "my liege.", "my brother gloucester's voice? yes, i know why you've come. i'll go with you. the day, my friends, and everything await me."], ["the sun glints off our armor. awake, my lords!", "mount up our horses! bring my horse, lackey! ha!", "oh, brave spirit!", "he'll take me through flood and field.", "is that all? how about air and fire?", "just the heavens, cousin orlans.", "is it time, my lord constable?", "listen to our horses neighing, longing to be working.", "mount them and dig your spurs into their flanks so that their hot blood may spurt in english eyes and douse them with some of the spare courage we have around. ha!", "what, you want them to weep our horses' blood? then how will we see their own natural tears?"], ["the english are in the field, french lords.", "to our horses, you gallant princes. let's mount straight away. all we have to do is look at that poor starving army, and our wonderful display of strength will eat away their souls, leaving them the mere husk of men. there isn't enough work out there to keep us all busy, and hardly enough blood in all their sickly veins put together to put a stain on each of our swords, which our french knights will take out and then put away again, with nothing to do. let's blow on them. the breath of our valor will send them sprawling. there's no question, lords, but that those extra servants and peasants swarming uselessly around our battle formations would be sufficient to rid this field of such a good-for-nothing foe, while we ourselves stood at the base of this mountain idly looking on. but our honor wouldn't stand for that. what's there to say? doing the very least will do the whole job. let the trumpets sound the signal to mount up and march. our advance will so dazzle the enemy that england will cower in fear and surrender.", "what are you waiting for, lords of france? those island-bred skeletons, terrified for their bones, are an offensive sight on the morning field. their ragged banners hang in shreds and the very air of france makes them shiver as it blows by. the god of war looks like a pathetic bankrupt in this miserable army, peeking timidly through a rusty visor. the horsemen stand frozen like candlesticks, torches in their hands. the poor"], ["horses droop their heads, their flanks and hips sagging, pus seeping from eyes as pale as death, and in their colorless mouths, the motionless bit is smeared with chewed grass. meanwhile, their , malicious crows, fly over them, impatient for their moment. it's beyond the power of words to describe an army so bereft of life.", "they've said their prayers, and now they wait for death.", "shall we go send them food and fresh clothing and feed their starving horses before we fight them?", "i'm just waiting for my flag-bearer. but, never mind, i can't wait. to the field! i'll take the banner from a trumpeter and use that. come, let's be off! the sun is up and we're wasting the day!"], ["where is the king?", "the king rode out alone to view their troops.", "they have fully sixty thousand fighting men.", "that's five to one. besides, they're fresh.", "may god's arm strike on our side! these are frightening odds. god be with all of you, princes. i'll go and join my men. if we don't meet again before we meet in heaven, still we'll meet joyfully. my noble lord of bedford, my dear lord gloucester, and my good lord exeter, and my kind kinsmen, warriors all, adieu.", "farewell, good salisbury; and may good luck go with you.", "farewell, kind lord. fight valiantly today. but then i do you wrong to say as much, since you are the very embodiment of bravery.", "he is as full of courage as of kindness, princely in both."], ["oh, if only we had with us here ten thousand of those men back home in england who aren't working today.", "who wishes that? my cousin westmoreland? no, my dear cousin. if we are slated to die, the fewer, the better for our country, and if we're slated to live, the fewer men, the greater the share of honor for each of us. in god's name, i beg you not to wish for one more man. by god, i am not selfish when it comes to money: i don't care who eats at my expense. it doesn't bother me when people borrow my clothing i don't care about these concrete things. but if it is a sin to be selfish about honor, i am the most guilty soul alive. no, my cousin, don't wish that even one man who is now in england were here instead. by god, i wouldn't lose as much honor as a single man more would cost me, i think not even if it meant giving up my best hope for victory. oh, do not wish one more! instead, make this known throughout the army: whoever has no spirit for this fight, let him depart. he will be given safe conduct and money for his passage home. we would not want to die in the company of a man who fears to die with us. this day is called the feast of saint crispian: he who lives to see this day out and comes home safe will stand tall when this day is named and raise himself up at the mention of crispian. he who survives this day and lives to see old age shall yearly entertain his neighbors on the eve, saying, \"tomorrow is .\" he'll roll up his sleeve and show his scars, saying, \"i got these wounds on st. crispin's day.\" old men forget. but these men will remember every detail of what they did today long after they've forgotten everything else. and as the wine flows, our names, familiar as household words, will be invoked again: harry the king, bedford and exeter, warwick and talbot, salisbury and gloucester. good men will tell their sons this story and the feast of st. crispin will never"], ["go by, from this day to the end of time, without our being remembered: we few, we happy few, we band of brothers for whoever sheds his blood with me today shall be my brother. however humble his birth, this day shall grant him nobility. and men back in english now safe in their beds will curse themselves for not having been here, and think less of their own manhood when they listen to the stories of those who fought with us here on st. crispin's day.", "my sovereign lord, join us quickly: the french are all arrayed in battle formation and will charge us at any moment.", "we're ready if our minds are ready.", "let any man perish who isn't ready now!", "you don't wish we had more help from england anymore, cousin?", "god almighty, my liege, i wish that you and i could fight this royal battle all alone."], ["there! now you've unwished five thousand men, which i prefer to your wishing for one more. you know your places. god be with you all.", "once more i come to ask you, king harry, if you're ready to negotiate your ransom before your certain defeat. for assuredly, you are so near the abyss that you're bound to be swallowed up. moreover, out of mercy, the constable urges you to remind your men to make their peace with god and repent, so that their souls may depart sweetly and peacefully from these fields where, poor wretches, their bodies will likely fall and fester.", "who sent you this time?", "the constable of france.", "be good enough to take back the same answer i gave before. tell them to capture me, then sell my bones. good god! why do they mock poor fellows this way? the man that once sold the skin of a lion while the beast still lived died hunting him. a good many of our bodies, i imagine, will end up in english soil. and on their graves, i trust, the story of this day's work will be written in brass. and those who leave their valiant bones in france, dying like men though buried in your dunghills they'll be remembered, too. the sun will rise on them here and draw their glory up to heaven, leaving their mortal remains to choke your land: the smell of rotting flesh will breed a plague in france."], ["then will you notice the abundant valor of our englishmen, who will embark on a second round of mischief like a ricocheting bullet, killing again as they fall to their deaths. let me speak proudly: tell the constable we're only workaday soldiers. our finery and shining metal are all rusty from long, painful marches in the rain. there's not a strand of feather left in our whole army a good sign, i hope, that we won't fly away like birds and time on the field has made us slovenly. but, by god, our hearts are in good shape. and my poor soldiers tell me that before night they'll be in cleaner clothes. if not, they'll pull the bright new coats of the french over their heads and send them on their way. if they do this, as they will, god willing, my ransom will soon be raised. herald, spare yourself. don't come again to ask for my ransom, good messenger. i swear the only ransom will be these bones of mine. and if the french get them in the state in which i intend to leave them, they won't be worth much use to anyone. tell the constable that.", "i shall, king harry. and so farewell. you'll never hear from the herald again.", "i'm afraid you'll come to me again for ransom."], ["my lord, most humbly on bended knee i beg you to grant me the leading of the vanguard.", "take it, brave york. now, soldiers, advance. and you, god, bestow today's victory however it pleases you."], ["surrender, dog!", "you seem like a gentleman of high rank.", "qualtitie calmie me! are you a gentleman? what is your name? expound.", "oh, god above!", "this man, one , must be a gentleman. consider my words, o. signieur dew, and take note: o. signieur dew, you'll be killed with my sword unless you pay me an absurd amount of money for your ransom.", "oh, have mercy! take pity on me!", "( moi ) one is not enough. i must have forty s, or i will reach into your throat and pull out some s, along with a lot of blood.", "is it impossible to escape your mighty arm?"], ["( bras, ) brass, you dog! you damned lazy mountain goat, do you offer me brass?", "( ) oh, spare me!", "really? is that a lot of s? come over here, boy and ask this slave in french what his name is.", "look, what's your name?", "monsieur le fer.", "he says his name is master fer.", "master fer! i'll fer him, and him, and him: expound as much to him in french.", "i do not know the french for \"fer,\" and \"ferret,\" and \"firk.\"", "tell him to prepare himself for death, for i'm going to cut his throat.", "boy what is he saying, sir?", "he told me to tell you to prepare to die, for this soldier here is of a mind to cut your throat without delay.", "( ) yes, cut your throat, by god, you peasant, unless you give me gold coins, good gold coins. if not, you'll be mangled by this sword of mine."], ["oh, i beseech you, for the love of god, spare me! i am a gentleman of good family: spare me and i will give you two hundred .", "what does he say?", "he begs you to spare his life. he is a gentleman of a good family, and for his ransom, he will give you two hundred crowns.", "tell him my fury will abate, and i'll take the crowns.", "young sir, what does he say?", "once again, that it would be breaking his oath to pardon any prisoner. nevertheless, for the crowns that you've promised him, he is willing to give you freedom, liberty.", "on my knees i thank you again and again. and i consider myself fortunate to have fallen into the hands of a knight to my mind, the noblest, most valiant, and most distinguished gentleman of england.", "explain, boy.", "he thanks you on his knees many times and considers himself fortunate to have fallen into the hands of one, as he thinks, who is the bravest, most valorous, and thrice-worthy gentleman of england.", "as i get to leech him, i will show some mercy. follow me."], ["follow the mighty captain.", "i never heard so loud a voice issue from such an empty heart. it's true what they say: \"the empty vessel makes the greatest sound.\" bardolph and nym had ten times more courage than this roaring stage villain, whose nails any joe could cut with a wooden dagger, but they are both hanged. so would this man if he had the nerve to steal anything bravely. i have to stay with the servants, who are with our camp's luggage. we're sitting ducks for the french, if they only knew it, for there is no one guarding it but boys."], ["o, hell!", "o lord, the day is lost! all is lost!", "dear god! all is lost, all! regret and everlasting shame sit on our helmets, mocking us.", "what stinking luck! do not run away.", "our men have all broken ranks.", "o, everlasting shame! let's fall on our swords. are these the wretches that we threw dice for?", "is this the king we offered to ransom?", "shame, eternal shame, and nothing but shame! let us die honorably. back into the fray once again! he who will not follow me now, let him depart and stand in the doorway like a pimp, cap in hand, while some slave, no nobler than my dog, violates his daughter.", "maybe we can benefit from the same chaos that has defeated us. let's go offer up our lives ."], ["there are enough of us still alive in the field to overcome the english with our numbers if we could just restore some kind of order.", "the hell with order! i'm going back into battle. let life be short so that shame won't last too long."], ["we have done well, my valiant countrymen. but it's not over. the french are still fighting.", "the duke of york sends your majesty his respects.", "is he still alive, good uncle? three times in an hour i saw him down, and three times up again and fighting. he was covered with blood from his helmet to his spurs.", "the valiant soldier is still dressed like that, lying on the ground, drenching the field with his blood. by his side lies the noble earl of suffolk, york's comrade and equal in brave wounds. suffolk died first, and york, cut to pieces, came to him where he lay in his blood and took him by the face, kissing his gashes. he cried out, \"wait for me, dear cousin. my soul will keep yours company on the way to heaven. wait for mine, sweet soul. we'll fly there side by side, just as we stood together as brother-knights in this glorious and well-fought battle!\" at this, i went to comfort him. he smiled at me close, gave me his hand, gripping me feebly, and said, \"my dear lord, commend my service to my king.\" with that, he turned and threw his wounded arm around suffolk's neck and kissed his lips. and so,"], ["married to death, he sealed a testament of love that even ended in nobility. the fineness of the moment moved me to tears. i tried to hold them back, but wept like a mother.", "i don't blame you. just listening, i have to school my misty eyes, or they will brim over.", "but listen! what new battle is this? the french have reinforced their scattered men. then every soldier must kill his prisoners. spread the word."], ["to kill the boys with the luggage! it's expressly against the rules of combat. it's as complete a work of villainy as any that could be thought up. tell me, don't you think so?", "there's certainly not a boy left alive, and it was done by the cowardly rascals who were running from the battle. on top of this, they've either burned or carried away everything that was in the king's tent. so the king has quite rightly ordered that every prisoner's throat be cut. oh, he's a gallant king!", "yes, he was born at monmouth, captain gower. what is the name of the town where alexander the was born?", "alexander the great.", "and is \"pig\" not the same as \"great,\" may i ask? the pig or the mighty or the huge or the magnanimous they all mean the same thing, with some variation.", "i think alexander the great was born in macedon. his father was philip of macedon, as i remember.", "i think that macedon is indeed where alexander was born. i tell you, captain, if you look at a map of the world, i'll bet you will find, comparing macedon and monmouth, that the situations, see, are very similar."], ["there is a river in macedon, and there is likewise a river in monmouth. the river in monmouth is called wye, but the name of the other river has gone out of my head. nevertheless, it's all one the two rivers are as alike as my fingers are to my fingers, and there are salmon in both. if you look closely at alexander's life, harry of monmouth's stands up fairly well by comparison for there are analogies in everything. alexander, god knows and you know, in his rages and his furies and his wraths and his angers and his moods and his displeasures and his indignations, and also being a little the worse for drink, killed his best friend cleitus in a drunken rage, see.", "our king is not like him in that respect: he never killed any of his friends.", "it is not courteous, you know, to assume you know my meaning before i've finished talking. i'm speaking purely in analogies and comparisons. just as alexander killed his friend cleitus when he was drinking, so harry monmouth, having come to his senses and acquired good judgment, turned away the fat knight in the oversized doublet: the man was full of jests and japes and pranks and mocks. i have forgotten his name.", "sir john falstaff.", "that's the one. i tell you, there are good men born at monmouth.", "here comes his majesty."], ["i was not angry since i came to france until this instant. take a trumpet, herald. ride out to the horsemen on that hill. if they seek battle with us, have them come down or else clear the field. the sight of them is offensive. if they'll do neither, we'll come to them and make them fly like stones shot from powerful slings. we'll also cut the throats of any prisoners we have. not a man of them that we shall take shall know our mercy. go and tell them this.", "here comes the herald of the french, my liege.", "he looks humbler than he used to.", "well? what is the meaning of this, herald? don't you know that i have offered these bones of mine for ransom? are you coming again for ransom?", "no, great king. i come to ask you out of charity to let us wander over this bloody field to record the numbers of our dead and bury them, separating our nobles from the common men, for many of our princes alas! lie drowned and soaked in the blood of mercenary soldiers. likewise, our common men lie drenched in the blood of princes, and their wounded steeds, ankle-deep in gore, struggle and, raging wildly, stamp on their dead masters with their hooves, killing them a second time. oh, give us permission, great king, to search the field in safety and dispose of our dead bodies."], ["i'll be honest with you, herald: i don't even know who won the battle. i still see many of your horsemen galloping across the field.", "you won it.", "god, not our strength, be praised! what is the name of the castle that stands over there?", "agincourt.", "then we'll call this the battle of agincourt, fought on the day of crispin crispianus.", "if i may say so, your majesty, your famous grandfather and your great-uncle edward, the black prince of wales or so i've read in the history books fought a very brave battle here in france.", "they did, fluellen.", "your majesty is quite right. if your majesties recall it, the welsh fought very valiantly in a garden where there were leeks growing, wearing leeks in their monmouth caps which, your majesty knows, is to this day a badge of honorable military service. i do believe your majesty takes no shame in wearing the leek on saint davy's day."], ["i wear it with pride, for i am welsh you know, good countryman.", "all the water in wye cannot wash your majesty's welsh blood out of your body. i can tell you that. god bless it and preserve it, as long as it pleases his grace, and his majesty, too!", "thanks, my good countryman.", "by jesus, i am your majesty's countryman, and i don't care who knows it. i will confess it to all the world. i needn't be ashamed of your majesty, god be praised, so long as your majesty is an honest man.", "god keep me so. heralds, go with him. bring me an exact report of the number of dead on both sides. williams tell that fellow over there to come here.", "soldier, you must come to the king.", "soldier, why are you wearing that glove in your cap?", "if it pleases your majesty, it is the token of a man i must fight with, if he's still alive.", "an englishman?", "if i may say so, your majesty, he is a rascal who quarreled with me last night, and who, if he lives and ever dares to challenge this glove, will get a box on the ear from me. or, if i see him wearing my glove in his cap, which he swore as a soldier he would wear if he lived, i will knock it off his head."], ["what do you say, captain fluellen? should this soldier keep his oath?", "if i may say so, your majesty, as i see it he would be a coward and a villain not to.", "it may be that his antagonist is a gentleman of very high degree, quite outside of his own sphere.", "even if he were as important a man as the devil as lucifer or beelzebub himself he's required, see, your grace, to keep his vow. if he backs down, he'll become as notorious a villain and as saucy a jack as ever walked on god's earth, in my opinion.", "then keep your vow, fellow, when you meet the man.", "so i will, my liege. i swear on my life.", "whom do you serve under?", "under captain gower, my liege.", "gower is a good captain, and is well versed and well read in the wars.", "have him come to me here, soldier.", "i will, my liege."], ["here, fluellen, stick this in your cap. williams' fluellen when alenon and i went down together, i plucked this glove from his helmet. if any man challenges it, he is a friend to alenon and an enemy to me. if you encounter such a man, arrest him and prove your loyalty to me.", "your grace does me as great an honor as could be wished by any of his subjects. i'd like to see the man with two legs who takes offense at this glove, that's all! just once i'd like to see it, if it please god to grant me that.", "do you know captain gower?", "he is my dear friend, your majesty.", "go find him, please, and bring him to my tent.", "i'll fetch him.", "my lord of warwick and my brother gloucester, follow fluellen at a close distance. the glove which i have given him to wear may possibly win him a box on the ear. it belongs to the soldier i was just talking to. according to an agreement, i should wear it myself. follow fluellen, cousin warwick, and if the soldier strikes him and i would think from his forthright manner that he'll keep his word some mischief may arise as a result. i know fluellen to be very conscious of his honor and quick to anger, hot as gunpowder and"], ["likely to return any injury promptly. follow and see to it that nothing serious happens between them. you come with me, uncle of exeter."], ["i'm sure it is to knight you, captain.", "as it is god's will and pleasure, captain, i entreat you to come quickly to the king. there is more good fortune in store for you than you could ever imagine.", "sir, do you recognize this glove?", "know the glove! i know the glove is a glove.", "well, i recognize this one fluellen , and i hereby challenge you.", "good god! as absolute a traitor as any in the whole entire world or even france or england!", "what is this, you villain!", "do you think i'd break my oath?", "stand aside, captain gower. i'll reward treason with blows, i promise you.", "i'm not a traitor.", "an infamous lie! i accuse you in the name of the king. arrest him: he's a friend of the duke of alenon's."], ["now, now! what's all this? what's going on?", "my lord of warwick, a most corrupt treason god be praised for it! has been discovered, as plain as any you'd hope to see on a summer's day.", "here is his majesty.", "well, now! what's the matter?", "my liege, this man is a villain and a traitor, who see, your grace has struck the glove which your majesty took from alenon's helmet.", "my liege, this was my glove. here is its mate, and the man i gave it to promised to wear it in his cap, and i promised to strike him if he did. i met this man with my glove in his cap, and i have been as good as my word.", "your majesty, see here if it won't offend your grace what a complete, rascally, beggarly, lousy rat this is. i hope your majesty will, in all good conscience, bear me out and vouch for the fact that this is the glove of alenon and that your majesty gave it to me.", "give me your glove, soldier: look, here is its mate. it was i, in fact, whom you promised to strike. and you spoke of me in the harshest terms."], ["if it pleases your majesty, let his neck pay the price, if there is any martial law in the world.", "how can you square things with me?", "all offenses come from the heart, my lord, and nothing intended to offend your majesty ever came from mine.", "you abused me to my face.", "your majesty didn't present yourself as the king. you represented yourself as just a common man. consider the time of night, what you were wearing, and how ordinary you looked. anything your highness suffered in that disguise, i beg you to see it as your own fault and not mine, because if you'd been what i took you for, there would have been no offense. therefore, i beg your highness, pardon me.", "here, uncle exeter, fill this glove with gold coins and give it to this fellow. keep it, my friend, and wear it as a badge of honor in your cap until i challenge it. give him the money. and you, captain, must make it up with him.", "by this day and this light, the fellow is certainly brave. here, twelve pence for you. i urge you to serve god and stay out of brawls and dust-ups and quarrels and disputes. i promise it will be better for you if you do.", "i'll have none of your money."], ["it's meant in good will. i tell you, you can use it to get your shoes fixed. come, why be so hesitant? your shoes are in pretty bad shape. it's a good shilling, i promise you. if not, i'll get another one for you.", "now, herald, have the dead been counted?", "here is the count of the slaughtered french.", "what prisoners of rank have been taken, uncle?", "charles duke of orlans, nephew to the king; john duke of bourbon, and lord bouciqualt: of other lords and barons, knights and squires, a full fifteen hundred, besides common men.", "this paper tells me of ten thousand frenchmen who lie dead on the battlefield. among them are one hundred twenty-six princes and standard-bearing nobles. add to these eight thousand four hundred knights, squires, and brave gentlemen, five hundred of whom were given the title of knight only yesterday. among the ten thousand the french have lost only sixteen hundred are mercenaries. the rest of the dead are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires, and gentlemen of birth and rank. the names of those of their nobles that lie dead: charles delabreth, high constable of france; jaques of chatillon, admiral of france; the master of the crossbows, lord rambures; great master of france, the brave sir guichard dolphin, john duke of alenon, anthony duke of brabant, the brother of the duke of burgundy, and edward duke of bar. of brave earls, grandpr and roussi, fauconberg and foix, beaumont and marle, vaudemont and lestrale. here was a"], ["royal fellowship of death! where is the number of our english dead?", "edward the duke of york, the earl of suffolk, sir richard ketly, davy gam, esquire. no one else of name, and only twenty-five other men. oh, god, your power was with us. what happened here is your doing alone, not ours. when was there ever before so great a loss on one side and so little on the other, in the ordinary and equal clash of battle? take credit, god, for it is no one's doing but yours.", "it's unbelievable.", "come, let's make a solemn procession to the village. and let it be proclaimed throughout our army that it shall be a hanging offense for anyone to boast of this or take from god the credit that belongs to him alone.", "if it pleases your majesty, isn't it permissible to mention the number of casualties?", "yes, captain, but with this acknowledgement that god fought for us.", "yes, i truly think he did great good."], ["we'll perform all the holy rites. let and be sung, and let the dead be buried properly. then on to calais and from there to england. there have never been more fortunate men than we to return from france."], ["allow me to fill in the gaps for those of you who have not read this story. as for those who have, i beg you to excuse the gaps in time, and the many people and things that cannot be represented here in all their magnitude and proper form. let's bring the king now to calais. imagine him there and, having seen him there, haul him back across the sea on the wings of your imagination. there's the coast of england: see how the sea seems to be fenced in by the men and wives and boys who line the shore, their shouts and wild applause drowning out the deep roar of the surf. as the king's ship draws near, the very ocean is like a man running before the king, preparing his way. let's have him land and solemnly proceed to london. thoughts work so quickly that even now you can imagine him on blackheath, where his lords suggest that he should carry his battle-scarred sword and helmet on a procession through the city. he refuses, as he is free of vanity and self-serving pride and ascribes all the glory and responsibility for victory to god. now in the factory of thought, create the image of all london pouring forth into the streets. picture the mayor and all his brother citizens dressed in their best as they go forth like senators of ancient rome to welcome home their conquering caesar. imagine if our own queen's general returned from ireland, having stamped out the rebellion there, as we hope he does very soon, how many people would leave the city to come welcome him. even more people than that welcomed harry home,"], ["and they had even more reason. let's put him now in london, since france's period of mourning requires the king of england to stay home. imagine a visit of the holy roman emperor, working on france's behalf. he wants to bring about a peace between the two countries. skip over all the particularities between then and harry's return to france. there we must place him, and i myself have covered the interim period by reminding you that it has taken place. so, keeping this omission in mind, immediately return to france, your eyes following the path of your thoughts."], ["yes, that's true, but why are you wearing your leek today? saint davy's day has passed.", "there are reasons and causes why and how in everything. i'll tell you as my friend, captain gower: that rascally, mean, beggarly, lousy, bragging pistol, whom you and yourself and all the world know to be no better than a peasant see with no good qualities at all: he came to me yesterday and brought me bread and salt and told me to eat my leek. we were somewhere where i couldn't pick a fight with him, but i've decided to wear it in my cap until i see him again, whereupon i'll give him a little piece of my mind.", "and here he comes, puffing himself up like a turkey.", "never mind his puffings and his turkeys. god bless you, ensign pistol! you lousy, rotten, villain, god bless you!", "are you mad? do you want me to cut your life short, you deceiving lowlife? away! the smell of leek turns my stomach.", "i wonder if you'd be so good, you lousy, rotten villain, to grant my wish and my request and gratify me, see, by eating this leek. i'd like you to, see, because you don't like it, and because it isn't to your taste, and because it doesn't agree with you."], ["not for cadwallader and all his goats.", "here's a goat for you. ( ) will you be good enough to eat it, mangy rascal?", "dissolute lowlife, you shall die.", "that's very true, mangy rascal, when it pleases god. meanwhile, i'd be gratified if you'd live and eat your food. come, here's some sauce to go with it. ( ) yesterday you called me \"mountain squire.\" today i'll make you squire of the low ground. go on, eat up. if you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.", "enough, captain. you've stunned him.", "i tell you, i'll either make him eat some part of this leek or give him a four-day head-bashing. go on, bite. it's good for your fresh wound and your bloody noggin.", "must i bite?", "yes, absolutely, no question or ambiguity about it.", "by this leek, i swear i'll make you pay for this. (fluellen ) okay, okay, i'm eating it", "please do. would you like some more sauce to go with it? there isn't enough leek left for you to swear on.", "lay off, already! can't you see i'm eating?"], ["i sincerely hope it does you good, mangy rascal. no, don't throw any of it away. the skin is good for your cracked head. when you see leeks in the future, i hope you keep mocking them. that's all.", "good.", "yes, leeks are good. wait, here's a penny to heal your head.", "me, a penny?", "yes, and you'll take it. if not, i have another leek in my pocket that you can eat.", "i'll take this penny as a token that you'll pay for this.", "if i owe you anything, i'll pay you in clubbings. you'll become a wood salesman and buy nothing but clubs from me. god be with you and keep you, and may he heal your head.", "there'll be hell to pay for this.", "go on, get out of here. you're a lying, cowardly wretch. you mock an ancient tradition, born of reverence and worn in honor of brave men who have died, and then have the gall not to stand by your words. i've seen you bait and mock this man more than once. you thought because he didn't speak english like a native he couldn't handle an english club. you've learned otherwise. let this be a welsh lesson to you to behave with english manners in the future. farewell."], ["has fortune turned on me, like the whore she is? i've had news that my nell died of the pox in a hospice. there went my last refuge. i grow old, and all dignity has been thrashed out of me. well, i'll turn pimp and do some occasional pickpocketing. i'll steal away to england, and i'll steal some more when i get there. i'll bandage up these wounds and swear i got them in the french wars."], ["peace to this occasion that's brought us all together. health and good day to our brother the king of france and to our sister the queen. joy and good wishes to our lovely royal cousin, katherine. and you, duke of burgundy, who brought this great assembly together, we salute you as descendent and member of this royal family. and a health to all you lords and princes of france.", "we rejoice to see you, most worthy brother of england. you are welcome here, as are all of you english princes.", "brother of england, may this meeting prove as fruitful as it is joyous. we are glad to look upon your face a face whose eyes have until now carried in them a glance as deadly, for any frenchman they alighted on, as the poisonous eyes of those mythical lizards, the basilisks. we hope your poison has worn off and this day shall transform all grievances and quarrels into friendship.", "we're here to say \"amen\" to that.", "all you english princes, i salute you."], ["great kings of france and england, i owe you both equal service and loyalty. your highnesses can both attest to the fact that i've strived mightily, with all my wits and energy, to bring about this royal meeting between you two imperial majesties. since i have succeeded to the point of bringing you face to face and eye to eye, don't take it ill if i formally demand to know, before this royal congregation, what obstacle or impediment prevents the poor fragile, mangled peace, the mother of arts and joyous births, from showing her lovely face in this most fertile garden of the world, our fair france? alas, she has been too long exiled from france, whose crops all lie in heaps, rotting with ripeness. her grapes, which make the wine that cheers our hearts, die unpruned on the vines. her once-trimmed hedges, like prisoners with wild, untended hair, put forth unruly twigs. her fallow fields are overgrown with weeds, while the blade that should uproot such wilderness lies rusting. the level meadow, where the freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover once grew, has become useless: unmowed, it grows to seed, so that nothing springs up but weeds, rough thistles, barren plants, and burs. and just as our vineyards, fallow fields, meadows, and hedges, which grow improperly if left to themselves, run riot, so our families and ourselves and our"], ["children have lost or no longer have time to learn skills that should be a credit to our country. they grow like savages like soldiers who meditate on nothing but blood surrounded by swearing and stern looks, ragged clothing and everything unnatural. it's to reverse all this, so we can once again become as we were, that you have all been brought together; therefore i demand to know why gentle peace should not banish these troubles and bless us with her former qualities.", "duke of burgundy, if you want peace, the lack of which creates these misfortunes you describe, you must purchase it buy agreeing across-the-board to all our very just demands. you hold the details and particulars of our terms, briefly enumerated, before you in your hands.", "the king has heard them, but as yet has made no answer.", "well, the peace you pleaded for so eloquently just now lies in his answer.", "i've only given the articles a cursory glance. if your grace would kindly appoint some members of your council to sit with me once more and go over them more carefully, i will give my answer and acceptance right away.", "brother, i shall. go, uncle exeter, and brother clarence, and you, brother gloucester, warwick and huntingdon, go with the king. you have full power to confirm, change, or add to any of my demands in any"], ["way that you judge advantageous to my rule, and i'll undertake to agree to it. fair sister, will you go with the princes or stay here with me?", "gracious brother, i will go with them. perhaps a woman's voice may do some good when some small detail proves to be holding things up.", "in that case, leave our cousin katherine here with us. she is our principal demand one of the first points of the treaty.", "she is welcome to stay.", "lovely, most lovely katherine, will you agree to teach a soldier the words that would recommend his love-suit to a gentle heart like yours?", "your majesty shall mock at me. i cannot speak your england.", "lovely katherine, if you will love me well with your french heart, i'm happy to hear you confess it in broken english. do you like me, kate?", "pardon me but i do not know what is \"like me.\"", "an angel is like you, kate, and you are like an angel.", "( alice ) what does he say? that i am like an angel?", "( ) yes, your grace, that's what he says."], ["i said so, dear katherine, and i'm not ashamed to repeat it.", "( ) oh, lord! the tongues of men are full of deceit.", "( alice) what does she say, pretty one? that the tongues of men are full of deceits?", ", dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits: dere's de princess for you.", "how very english of her. kate, my wooing is fit for your understanding: i am glad your english isn't better. if it were, you would find me such an ordinary king that you would think i'd sold my farm to buy my crown. i don't know any fancy ways of talking about love, only to say right out, \"i love you.\" if you press me any further than with the question, \"do you really?\" my love scene is over. so give me your answer, and we'll shake on it. deal?", "with all due respect, me understand well.", "really, if you were thinking of having me write poetry or dance for you, kate, you've defeated me already. i have no gift for the one and no strength for the other, though i have the gift of strength. if i could win a lady by playing leapfrog or vaulting into my saddle with my armor on my back though you may accuse me of boasting i could easily get myself a wife. i can fight with my fists and rear my horse up without falling off him, if either of those things could win me love. but,"], ["before god, kate, i cannot turn pale on purpose or gasp out fancy phrases, and i have no gift for clever declarations, only blunt oaths, which i never use till i'm asked and never break no matter who asks me. if you can love a man of this temperament, kate, whose face a sunburn wouldn't make any worse and who never looks in the mirror to admire himself, let your eye improve me. i speak to you as a plain soldier. if you can love me for this, take me. if not, to tell you i will die is true, but not for love, by god. and yet i do love you. so take for life a fellow of pure and plain faithfulness. he's bound to be true to you as he won't be up to flirting with other women. these chatty fellows who can rhyme their way into a lady's good graces always reason themselves out again. look, a talker is just a gabber; a poem is just a rhyme. a good leg will shrink, a straight back stoop, a black beard turn white, a curly head grow bald, an attractive face grow wrinkled and a pretty eye hollow. but a good heart, kate, is the sun and the moon, or, rather, the sun, and not the moon, for it goes on shining brightly forever. if you would have such a man, take me. take me and get a soldier; take a soldier and get a king. so what do you say to my suit? speak, my fair one, and speak fairly, i beg you.", "is it possible dat i sould love de enemy of france?", "no, it is not possible you should love the enemy of france, kate. but in loving me, you would love the friend of france, for i love france so much that i will not part with a single village of it. i will have it all mine. and, kate, when france is mine and i am yours, then france is yours and you are mine.", "i don't understand all dat."], ["no, kate? i will tell you in french, which i am sure will hang as heavily on my tongue as a newly married wife around her husband's neck, impossible to shake off. ( ) i, when, on the possession of france, and when you have the possession of me ( ) let me see, what then? help me, saint denis! ( ) then yours is france and you are mine. ( ) it would be as easy for me to reconquer the kingdom, kate, as it would be for me to speak that much french again. i'll never move you in french, except to laugh at me.", "your french, sir, is better than my english.", "no, really, it's not, kate. but your speaking my language, and i yours comes to pretty much the same thing. can you understand this much english though, kate? could you love me?", "i cannot tell.", "can any of your neighbors tell, kate? i'll ask them. come, i know you love me. and at night, when you go to your bedroom, you'll question this gentlewoman about me and, i know, kate, you'll criticize those qualities of mine that you secretly love. but mock me gently, dear kate, because i love you terribly. if i ever win you, kate, as i have an inkling i will, it won't be without a skirmish and that suggests you'd make a good mother of soldiers. shall not you and i together, then, between saint denis and saint george, make a boy, half french, half english, who will go to constantinople"], ["and grab the turk by the beard? shall we not? what do you say, my fair ?", "i do not know dat.", "no, of course you don't. it lies in the future, along with certainty. now there can only be the promise. do promise, kate, that you'll do your french part to bring forth such a boy; and for my english half, take the word of a king and a bachelor. what's your answer, ( ) oh loveliest of katherines, my most precious and divine goddess?", "your majesty has false french enough to deceive de wisest lady in france.", "damn my false french. i tell you truly, in true english: i love you, kate. and though i wouldn't dare to swear that you love me, still my blood begins to flatter me that you do, despite the ill effects of my face. curse my father's ambition! he was thinking of civil wars when he conceived me, and consequently my outward appearance is harsh and steely. i intimidate ladies when i come to woo them. but i promise you, kate: the older i grow the better i'll look. my comfort is that old age, that poor preserver of beauty, can't make my face any worse than it already is. if you have me, you have me now at my worst; and if you have me, you'll appreciate me better and better. therefore tell me, fairest katherine, will you have me? put aside your maiden blushes and speak your true feelings with the bearing of an empress. take me by the hand and say, \"harry of england, i am yours.\" no sooner shall i hear that word than i will tell you straight out, \"england is yours, ireland is yours, france is yours, and harry plantagenet"], ["is yours.\" and, though i say so in his presence, if he's not a friend of the best kings, you'll find him king of the best friends. come on, tell me in broken music for your voice is music and your english broken. come, katherine queen of all, reveal your heart to me in broken english. will you have me?", "dat is as it shall please de king my father.", "oh, it will please him, kate. it will please him very well.", "den it shall also content me.", "with that i kiss your hand and call you my queen.", "( ) no, sir! stop, stop! heavens, i can't allow you to lower yourself by kissing the hand of one of your humble servants. i hope you'll pardon me, mighty king.", "then i will kiss your lips, kate.", "( ) it is not the custom for french maidens to kiss before they are married.", "what does she say, madam interpreter?", "dat it not be de custom pour les ladies of france i cannot tell vat is en anglish.", "to kiss."], ["your majesty understand bettre den me.", "it is not the custom for the maids in france to kiss before they are married, is that what she says?", "yes, exactly.", "oh, kate, prudish customs bow before great kings. you and i cannot be held within the confines of a country's arbitrary customs, dear kate. you and i, kate, we are the makers of custom, and the freedom that goes with our position silences all who would criticize, as i will silence you for upholding the prudish custom of your country in refusing me a kiss. therefore, willingly and yielding. ( ) you have witchcraft in your lips, kate. there is more eloquence in a sweet touch of them than in the tongues of the whole french council. they would persuade harry of england sooner than a whole assembly of monarchs. here comes your father.", "god save your majesty. my royal kinsman, are you teaching our princess english?", "i wanted to teach her how perfectly i love her, kinsman, and that's good english.", "she picks it up quick, doesn't she?", "our language is rough, friend, and it's not in my nature to speak smoothly. so, possessing neither a voice nor a heart for flattery, i can't awaken the spirit of love in her so as to make him appear in his true likeness."], ["forgive my boldness if i take you up on your words about making magic. for love to appear in his true likeness, he would have to be as cupid is: naked and blind. how can you blame her, a tender young maiden still given to virgin blushes, for objecting to having a blind, naked boy appear before her? it's a lot to ask of a maiden.", "but virgins close their eyes and submit all the time, and blind love has his way.", "they're forgiven, then, if they don't see what they're doing.", "then teach your cousin to also be willing to close her eyes, my lord.", "i will signal her with a wink to consent, my lord, if you will teach her what that means. maidens who are well fed and well taken care of are like august flies, blind though they can see. they'll let you handle them then, though they'd scarcely let you look at them before.", "so you're telling me to give it time and wait for summer. and even then, in order for me to catch the fly your cousin, she must be blind?", "like love, my lord, before it learns to love.", "fair enough. some of you may, thank love for my blindness. there's many a french town that i can't see because one pretty french maid stands in front of me.", "oh yes, my lord, you see them, but you see them metaphorically. the cities appear to you like a maiden because virgin walls, which war has never invaded, surround them."], ["shall kate be my wife?", "if you wish.", "i am satisfied, as long as the maiden cities you talk of come with her. that way, the maiden that stood between me and them shall be the means of my achieving my desire.", "we have consented to all reasonable terms.", "is that true, my lords of england?", "the king has agreed to every point: first his daughter, then everything else, as you strictly proposed.", "except that he has not yet agreed to address you in this form and with this title in french, ; and in latin, ,", "and even this i'm willing to grant if you request it.", "in that case, i ask that for the sake of friendship and alliance you let that one item stand with the rest, and bestow your daughter on me.", "take her, my son, and give me children by her, so that the warring kingdoms of france and england, whose very shores have paled in envy at each other's happiness, may finally end their mutual hostility. may this"], ["precious marriage cause friendship and alliance between them and war never again threaten england or fair france with his bloody sword.", "amen.", "now, welcome, kate. and let everyone bear witness that here i kiss her as my sovereign queen.", "may god, who is the best matchmaker, join your hearts and realms in one. as man and wife, though two, are one in love, so let there be between your kingdoms such a marriage that neither wrongdoing nor fierce jealousy, which often trouble the sacred state of marriage, ever sever them. and let englishmen be french and frenchmen english. god say, \"amen\"!", "amen!", "let us prepare for our wedding. on that day, i'll take your oath of loyalty, my lord of burgundy and all my peers, to guarantee my treaty. then i will swear to kate and you to me, and may our oaths be faithfully kept and prove fortunate."], ["thus far has our straining author pursued the story with his crude, inadequate writing, keeping important people penned up in this little room while he mangled history's full glory with his uneven telling. the lifespan of our english hero was brief, but in that brief time he achieved greatness. he had good luck as a warrior, and with it he created the world's greatest garden, france, leaving his son as its imperial ruler. henry the sixth, crowned king of france and england while still in his infancy, succeeded him. but so many people had a hand in managing the child's kingdom that france was lost and civil war came to england a story we've acted out many times on this stage. with those plays in mind, we hope you'll receive this one kindly."]], [["get out of here! go home, you lazy men. what, is today a holiday? don't you know that working men aren't supposed to walk around on a workday without wearing their work clothes? you there, speak up. what's your occupation?", "i'm a carpenter, sir.", "where are your leather apron and your ruler? what are you doing, wearing your best clothes? and you, sir, what's trade?", "well, compared to a fine workman, you might call me a mere cobbler.", "but what's your trade? answer me straightforwardly.", "it is a trade, sir, that i practice with a clear conscience. i am a mender of worn soles.", "what trade, boy? you insolent rascal, what trade?", "sir, please, don't be angry. but if your soles are worn out, i can mend you.", "what do you mean by that? \"mend\" me, you impertinent fellow?!"], ["cobble you, sir.", "you're a cobbler, are you?", "sir, i make my living using an awl. i stick to my work; i don't meddle in politics or chase women. i'm a surgeon to old shoes. when they're endangered, i save them. the noblest men who ever walked on leather have walked on my handiwork.", "but why aren't you in your shop today? why are you leading these men through the streets?", "well, to wear out their shoes and get myself more work. seriously, though, we took the day off to see caesar, sir, and celebrate his triumph.", "why would you celebrate it? what victory does he bring home? what foreign lands has he conquered and captive foreigners chained to his chariot wheels? you blockheads, you unfeeling men! you hard hearts, you cruel men of rome, didn't you know ? many times you climbed up on walls and battlements, towers and windows even chimney tops with your babies in your arms, and sat there patiently all day waiting to see great pompey ride through the streets of rome. and when you caught a glimpse of his chariot, didn't you shout so loud that the river tiber shook as it echoed? and now you put on your best clothes? and now you take a holiday?"], ["and now you toss flowers in the path of caesar, who comes in triumph over pompey's defeated sons? go home! run to your houses, fall on your knees, and pray to the gods to spare you the pain that you deserve for such ingratitude.", "go, go, good countrymen, and to make up for having done wrong, gather up all the poor men like yourselves, lead them to the tiber, and weep into the river until it overflows its banks.", "well, that ought to move even the most thickheaded of them. there they go, feeling so guilty they're now tongue-tied they don't have a thing to say. you go down toward the capitol, and i'll go this way. undress the statues if they're decorated in honor of caesar.", "can we do that? you know it's the feast of .", "it doesn't matter. make sure that none of the statues are decorated in tribute to caesar. i'll walk around and force the commoners off the streets. you do the same, wherever the crowds are thick. if we take away caesar's support, he'll have to come back down to earth; otherwise, he'll fly too high and keep the rest of us in a state of fear and obedience."], ["calphurnia!", "quiet! caesar's talking.", "calphurnia!", "i'm here, my lord.", "stand right in antonius's path when he runs the race. antonius!", "yes, caesar?", "antonius, after you take off, don't forget to touch calphurnia, because our wise elders say that if you touch an infertile woman during this holy race, she'll be freed from the curse of sterility.", "i'll remember. when caesar says \"do this,\" it is done.", "continue, then, and don't forget to perform all of the rituals.", "caesar!"], ["who's calling me?", "quiet, everyone! quiet!", "who in the crowd is calling me? i hear a voice more piercing than the music of these trumpets calling \"caesar!\" speak. caesar is listening.", "beware of march 15th.", "who's that?", "a soothsayer tells you to beware of march 15th.", "bring him in front of me. let me see his face.", "you, fellow, step out of the crowd. this is caesar you're looking at.", "what do you have to say to me now? speak once again.", "beware of march 15th.", "he's insane. let's leave him. let's move.", "are you going to watch the race?"], ["not me.", "please, come.", "i don't like sports. i'm not competitive like antony. but don't let me keep you from going, cassius. i'll go my own way.", "brutus, i've been watching you lately. you seem less good-natured and affectionate toward me than usual. you've been stubborn and unfamiliar with me, your friend who loves you.", "cassius, don't take it badly. if i seem guarded, it's only because i'm uneasy with . lately i've been overwhelmed with private thoughts and inner conflicts, which have affected my behavior. but this shouldn't trouble my good friends and i consider you a good friend, cassius. don't think anything more about my distraction than that poor brutus, who is at war with himself, forgets to show affection to others.", "brutus, i misunderstood your feelings, and therefore kept to myself certain thoughts i might have shared. tell me, good brutus, can you see your face?", "no, cassius. the eye can't see itself, except by reflection in other surfaces."], ["that's true. and it's too bad, brutus, that you don't have any mirrors that could display your hidden excellence to yourself. i've heard many of the noblest romans next to immortal caesar speaking of you, complaining of the tyranny of today's government, and wishing that your eyes were working better.", "what dangers are you trying to lead me into, cassius, that you want me to look inside myself for something that's not there?", "i'll tell you, good brutus. and since you know you can see yourself best by reflection, i'll be your mirror and show you, without exaggeration, things inside you that you can't see. and don't be suspicious of me, noble brutus. if i were your average fool, or if i made my feelings for you worthless by making the same promises of friendship to everybody, or if you'd seen me first flattering men, hugging them tightly, and later slandering them behind their backs, or if you hear that i drunkenly declare friendship at banquets with all the rabble, only then, of course, go ahead and assume i'm dangerous.", "why are they shouting? i'm afraid the people have made caesar their king.", "really, are you afraid of that? then i have to assume you don't want him to be king."], ["i don't, cassius, though i love caesar very much. but why do you keep me here so long? what do you want to tell me? if it's for the good of all romans, i'd do it even if it meant my death. let the gods give me good luck only as long as i love honor more than i fear death.", "i know this quality in you, brutus it's as familiar to me as your face. indeed, honor is what i want to talk to you about. i don't know what you and other men think of this life, but as for me, i'd rather not live at all than live to worship a man as ordinary as myself. i was born as free as caesar. so were you. we both have eaten as well, and we can both endure the cold winter as well as he. once, on a cold and windy day, when the river tiber was crashing against its banks, caesar said to me, \"cassius, i dare you to jump into this rough water with me and swim to that point there.\" as soon as he spoke, though i was fully dressed, i plunged in and called for him to follow. and he did. the water roared, and we fought against it with vigorous arms. and, thanks to our fierce competitiveness, we made progress. but before we reached the end point, caesar cried, \"help me, cassius, or i will sink!\" and just as aeneas, the hero who founded rome, emerged from the fires of troy with his elderly father anchises on his shoulder, so i emerged from the tiber carrying the tired caesar."], ["and this is the man who has now become a god, and i'm a wretched creature who must bow down if caesar so much as carelessly nods my way. in spain, caesar had a fever, and it made him shake. it's true, this so-called \"god\" he shook. his cowardly lips turned white, and the same eye whose gaze terrifies the world lost its gleam. i heard him groan yes, i did and the same tongue that ordered the romans to obey him and transcribe his speeches in their books cried, \"give me some water, titinius,\" like a sick girl. it astounds me that such a weak man could beat the whole world and carry the trophy of victory alone.", "more shouting! i think this applause is for some new honors awarded to caesar.", "why, caesar straddles the narrow world like a giant, and we petty men walk under his huge legs and look forward only to dying dishonorably, as slaves. men can be masters of their fate. it is not destiny's fault, but our own faults, that we're slaves. \"brutus\" and \"caesar.\" what's so special about \"caesar\"? why should that name be proclaimed more than yours? write them together yours is just as good a name. pronounce them it is just as nice to say. weigh them it's just as heavy."], ["cast spells with them, and \"brutus\" will call up a ghost as well as \"caesar.\" now, in the name of all the gods, i ask you what food does caesar eat that has made him grow so great? our era should be ashamed! rome has lost the ability to raise noble men! when was there ever an age, since the beginning of time, that didn't feature more than one famous man? until now, no one could say that only one man mattered in all of vast rome. now, though, in all of rome, there's room for only one man. you and i have heard our fathers talk of another brutus your ancestor who would've let the devil himself reign in his roman republic before he let a king rule.", "i have no doubt that you love me. i'm beginning to understand what you want me to do. what i think about this, and about what's happening here in rome, i'll tell you later. for now, don't try to persuade me anymore i ask you as a friend. i'll think over what you've said, i'll listen patiently to whatever else you have to say, and i'll find a good time for us to discuss further such weighty matters. until then, my noble friend, think about this: i'd rather be a poor villager than call myself a citizen of rome under the hard conditions that this time is likely to put us through.", "i'm glad that my weak words have provoked even this small show of protest from you."], ["the games are done and caesar is returning.", "as they pass by, grab casca by the sleeve, and he'll tell you if anything important happened today in his usual sour way.", "i'll do so. but look, cassius, caesar looks angry and everyone else looks as if they've been scolded. calphurnia's face is pale, and cicero's eyes are as red and fiery as they get when senators are arguing with him at the capitol.", "casca will tell us what's the matter.", "antonio!", "caesar?", "antony i want the men around me to be fat, healthy-looking men who sleep at night. that cassius over there has a lean and hungry look. he thinks too much. men like him are dangerous.", "caesar don't be afraid of him, caesar. he isn't dangerous. he's a noble roman with a good disposition."], ["antony i wish he were fatter! but i'm not afraid of him. and yet, if i were capable of fearing anyone, cassius would be the first man i'd avoid. he reads a lot, he's a keen observer, and he sees the hidden motives in what men do. he doesn't like plays the way you do, antony. he doesn't listen to music. he rarely smiles, and when he does smile, he does so in a self-mocking way, as if he scorns himself for smiling at all. men like him will never be comfortable while someone ranks higher than themselves, and therefore they're very dangerous. i'm telling you what should be feared, not what i fear because after all, i am caesar. come over to my right side, because this ear is deaf, and tell me what you really think of cassius.", "brutus you tugged on my cloak. do you want to speak with me?", "yes, casca. tell us what happened today that put caesar in such a serious mood.", "but you were with him, weren't you?", "if i were, i wouldn't need to ask you what happened.", "a crown was offered to him, and he pushed it away with the back of his hand, like this and then the people started shouting."], ["what was the second noise for?", "the same thing.", "they shouted three times. what was the last cry for?", "for the same thing.", "the crown was offered to him three times?", "yes, indeed, it was, and he pushed it away three times, each time more gently than the last; and at each refusal my countrymen shouted.", "who offered him the crown?", "antony.", "tell us how it happened, noble casca.", "i can't explain it. it was all silly and so i paid no attention. i saw mark antony offer him a crown though it wasn't a real crown, just a small circlet and, as i told you, he refused it once though in my opinion he would've liked to have it. then antony offered it to him again, and he refused it again (though, in my opinion, he was reluctant to take his hand off it). then antony offered it the third time. he refused it the third time, and as he refused it the commoners hooted and clapped their chapped hands, and threw up their sweaty hats, and let loose such a great deal of stinking breath because caesar refused the crown that it nearly choked caesar, because he fainted and fell down. as for myself, i didn't dare laugh, for fear of opening my lips and inhaling the stinking air."], ["but wait a minute, please. did you say caesar fainted?", "he fell down in the marketplace and foamed at the mouth and was speechless.", "that's very likely. he has epilepsy, a disease where you fall down.", "no, caesar doesn't have epilepsy. you and i, and honest casca, we have epilepsy we've fallen.", "i don't know what you mean by that, but i'm sure caesar fell down. the rabble applauded and hissed him according to whether he pleased them or displeased them, just like they do to actors in the theater. if they didn't, i'm a liar.", "what did he say when he regained consciousness?", "indeed, before he fell down, when he realized the commoners were glad he refused the crown, he pulled open his robe and offered them his throat to cut. if i'd been a common laborer and hadn't taken him up on his offer, to hell with me. and so he fainted. when he regained consciousness again, he said that if he'd done or said anything wrong, he wanted them to know that it was all because of his sickness. three or four women near me cried, \"alas, good soul!\" and forgave him with all their hearts. but never mind them if caesar had stabbed their mothers, they would've forgiven him.", "and after that he came back here looking so serious?", "yes."], ["did cicero say anything?", "yes, he said something in greek.", "what did he say?", "if i told you i understood greek, i'd be lying. but those who understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads. as for myself, it was greek to me. i have more news too. murellus and flavius have been punished for pulling scarves off statues of caesar. there you go. there was even more foolishness, if i could only remember it.", "will you have dinner with me tonight, casca?", "no, i have a commitment.", "will you dine with me tomorrow?", "yes, if i'm still alive, and you're still sane, and your dinner is worth eating.", "good. i'll expect you.", "do so. farewell to you both.", "what a stupid man he's become! he was so sharp when he was in school."], ["he's still sharp when it comes to carrying out a bold or noble enterprise, though he puts on this show of stupidity. he speaks roughly, but what he says is smart, and his roughness makes other people enjoy listening to him.", "you're right, that's how it is. i'll leave you for now. if you'd like to talk tomorrow, i'll come to your home. or, if you don't mind, come to my home, and i'll wait for you.", "i'll do so. until then, think about the well-being of rome.", "well, brutus, you're noble. yet i see that your honorable character can be bent from its usual shape, which proves that good men should stick only to the company of other good men, because who is so firm that he can't be seduced? caesar resents me, but he loves brutus. if i were brutus now and brutus were me, i wouldn't have let him influence me. tonight i'll throw through his window a few letters in different handwriting as if they came from several citizens all testifying to the great respect romans have for brutus, and all alluding to caesar's unseemly ambition. and after this, let caesar brace himself, for we'll either dethrone him or suffer even worse than now."], ["good evening, casca. did you accompany caesar home? why are you breathless, and why are you staring like that?", "aren't you disturbed when the earth itself is shaking and swaying as if it were a flimsy thing? cicero, i've seen storms in which the angry winds split old oak trees, and i've seen the ocean swell, rage, and foam, as if it wanted to reach the storm clouds, but never before tonight, never until now, have i experienced a storm that drops fire. either there are wars in heaven, or else the world, too insolent toward the gods, provokes them to send destruction.", "what have you seen something so strange that it is clearly an omen from the gods?", "a common slave you'd know him if you saw him held up his left hand, which flamed and burned like twenty torches together. and yet his hand was immune to the fire and didn't get burned. also i've kept my sword unsheathed since i saw this in front of the capitol i met a lion who looked at me and strutted by without bothering to attack me. and there were a hundred spooked women huddled together in fear who swore they saw men on fire walk up and down the streets."], ["and yesterday the night owl sat hooting and shrieking in the marketplace at noon. when all these extraordinary things happen at once, we shouldn't say, \"these happenings can be explained rationally. they're natural enough.\" i think these things are omens of things to come in our country.", "indeed, it's a strange time. but men tend to interpret things however suits them and totally miss the actual meaning of the things themselves. is caesar visiting the capitol tomorrow?", "he is, because he told antonius to tell you he'd be there tomorrow.", "good night then, casca. this bad weather isn't good to walk around in.", "farewell, cicero", "who's there?", "a roman.", "it's casca i know your voice.", "your ear is good. cassius, what a night this is!", "it's a very pleasing night to honest men.", "who ever saw the heavens threaten like this?"], ["those who have known how bad things are here on earth. i have walked around the streets, exposing myself to the perilous night, unbuttoned like this, as you see, casca, baring my chest to the thunderbolt. when the forked blue lightning seemed to break open the sky, i put myself right where i thought it would hit.", "but why did you tempt the heavens like that? mankind's role is to fear and tremble when the almighty gods send warning signals.", "you're acting stupid, casca, and you lack the quick wits that a roman should have or else you don't use them. you go pale, you stare, and you act in awe of the strange disturbance in the heavens. but if you thought about the real reason for all these fires, all these gliding ghosts, for why birds and animals abandon their natural behavior, why old men, fools, and children make predictions, why all sorts of things have departed from the usual course of their natures and become monstrosities, then you'd understand that heaven had them act this way so they would serve as frightening warnings of an unnatural state to come. right this minute, casca, i could name a man who's just like this dreadful night. a man who thunders, throws lightning, splits open graves, and roars like the lion in the capitol."], ["a man no mightier than you or i in ability, yet grown as huge and frightening as tonight's strange happenings.", "you're talking about caesar, right, cassius?", "let it be who it is. romans today still have the powerful bodies of their ancestors, but, unfortunately, we don't have their manly spirits, and instead we take after our mothers. our tolerance for slavery and oppression shows us to be weak, like women.", "indeed, they say that the senators plan to establish caesar as a king tomorrow, and he'll wear his crown at sea and on land everywhere except here in italy.", "i know where i'll wear this dagger, then. i'll kill myself to save myself from slavery. in suicide, gods make the weak strong. in suicide, gods allow tyrants to be defeated. no stony tower, no brass walls, no airless dungeon, no iron chains can contain a strong mind. but if a man becomes weary of these obstacles, he can always kill himself. let everyone beware: i can shake off the tyranny that now oppresses me whenever i choose.", "so can i. in fact, every imprisoned man holds in his own hand the tool to free himself."], ["how can caesar be a tyrant then? poor man! i know he wouldn't be a wolf if the romans didn't act like sheep. he couldn't be a lion if the romans weren't such easy prey. people who want to start a big fire quickly start with little twigs. rome becomes complete trash, nothing but rubbish and garbage, when it works to light up the ambitions of someone as worthless as caesar. but, oh no! what have i said in my grief? i might be speaking to someone who to be a slave, in which case i'll be held accountable for my words. but i'm armed and i don't care about danger.", "you're talking to casca, not to some smiling, two-faced tattletale. say no more. shake my hand. if you're joining together to right these wrongs, i'll go as far as any one of you.", "that's a deal. now let me tell you, casca, i have already convinced some of the noblest romans to join me in an honorable but dangerous mission. and i know that by now they're waiting for me on the porch outside pompey's theater. we're meeting on this fearful night because no one is out on the streets. the sky tonight looks bloody, fiery, and terrible, just like the work we have to do."], ["hide for a minute someone's approaching fast.", "it's cinna. i recognize his walk. he's a friend. cinna, where are you going in such a hurry?", "to find you. who's that? metellus cimber?", "no, it's casca, someone who's going to work with us. aren't the others waiting for me, cinna?", "i'm glad casca is with us. what a fearful night this is! two or three of us have seen strange things.", "are the others waiting? tell me.", "yes, they are. oh, cassius, if you could only convince brutus to join us", "don't worry. good cinna, take this paper and be sure to lay it in the judge's chair where brutus sits, so he'll find it. and throw this one in his window, and attach this one with wax to the statue of brutus's ancestor, old brutus. when you've finished all this, return to the porch of pompey's theater, where you'll find us. are decius brutus and trebonius there?", "everyone's there except metellus cimber, and he's gone to look for you at your house. well, i'll hurry and put these papers where you told me.", "when you've finished, go back to pompey's theater."], ["come on, casca, you and i will go see brutus at his house before sunrise. he's three-quarters on our side already, and we'll win him over entirely at this meeting.", "oh, the people love him well. things that would look bad if we did them, brutus could do and look virtuous just like an alchemist turns worthless tin to gold.", "yes, you're absolutely right about how worthy brutus is and how much we need him. let's go, because it's already after midnight, and we want him on our side before daylight."], ["lucius, are you there? i can't tell by the position of the stars how near it is to daybreak lucius, are you there? i wish i had that weakness, to sleep too soundly. come on, lucius! wake up, i say! lucius!", "did you call me, my lord?", "put a candle in my study, lucius. call me when it's lit.", "i will, my lord.", "the only way is to kill caesar. i have no personal reason to strike at him only the best interest of the people. he wants to be crowned. the question is, how would being king change him? evil can come from good, just as poisonous snakes tend to come out into the open on bright sunny days which means we have to walk carefully. if we crown him, i have to admit we'd be giving him the power to do damage."], ["rulers abuse their power when they separate it from compassion. to be honest, i've never known caesar to let his emotions get the better of his reason. but everyone knows that an ambitious young man uses humility to advance himself, but when he reaches the top, he turns his back on his supporters and reaches for the skies while scorning those who helped him get where he is. caesar might act like that. therefore, in case he does, we must hold him back. and since our quarrel is with his future behavior, not what he does now, i must frame the argument like this: if his position is furthered, his character will fulfill these predictions. and therefore we should liken him to a serpent's egg once it has hatched, it becomes dangerous, like all serpents. thus we must kill him while he's still in the shell.", "the candle is burning in your study, sir. while i was looking for a flint to light it, i found this paper on the window, sealed up like this, and i'm sure it wasn't there when i went to bed. brutus", "go back to bed. it isn't daybreak yet. is tomorrow the 15th of march, boy?", "i don't know, sir.", "check the calendar and come tell me.", "i will, sir."], ["the meteors whizzing in the sky are so bright that i can read by them. \"brutus, you're sleeping. wake up and look at yourself. is rome going to etc. speak, strike, fix the wrongs!\" \"brutus, you're sleeping. wake up.\" i've noticed many such calls to action left where i would find them. \"is rome going to etc.\" what does this mean? will rome submit to one man's power? my ancestors drove tarquin from the streets of rome when he was pronounced a king. \"speak, strike, fix it!\" is this asking me to speak and strike? oh, rome, i promise you, if you're meant to receive justice, you'll receive it by my hand!", "sir, fifteen days of march have gone by.", "good. go to the gate. somebody's knocking.", "i haven't slept since cassius first began to turn me against caesar."], ["from the time when you decide to do something terrible to the moment you do it, everything feels unreal, like a horrible dream. the unconscious and the body work together and rebel against the conscious mind.", "sir, it's your brother-in-law cassius at the door. he wants to see you.", "is he alone?", "no, sir. there are others with him.", "do you know them?", "no, sir, their hats are pulled down over their ears and their faces are half buried under their cloaks, so there's no way to tell who they are.", "let them in.", "it's the faction that wants to kill caesar. oh, conspiracy, are you ashamed to show your face even at night, when evil things are most free? if so, when it's day, where are you going to find a cave dark enough to hide your monstrous face? no, don't bother to find a cave, conspiracy. instead, hide your true face behind smiles and friendliness."], ["if you went ahead and exposed your true face, hell itself wouldn't be dark enough to keep you from being found and stopped.", "i'm afraid we're intruding too boldly on your sleep time. good morning, brutus. are we bothering you?", "i was awake. i've been up all night. do i know these men who are with you?", "yes, every one of them. there isn't one of them who doesn't admire you, and each one of them wishes you had as high an opinion of yourself as every noble roman has of you. this is trebonius.", "he's welcome here.", "this is decius brutus.", "he's welcome too.", "this is casca. this is cinna. and this is metellus cimber.", "they're all welcome. what worries have kept you awake tonight?", "can i have a word with you?"], ["here's the east. won't the dawn come from here?", "no.", "excuse me, sir, it will. these gray lines that lace the clouds are the beginnings of the dawn.", "you're both wrong. here, where i point my sword, the sun rises. it's quite near the south, since it's still winter. about two months from now, the dawn will break further toward the north, and due east is where the capitol stands, here.", "cassius give me your hands, all of you, one by one.", "and let us swear to our resolution.", "no, let's not swear an oath. if the sad faces of our fellow men, the suffering of our own souls, and the corruption of the present time aren't enough to motivate us, let's break it off now and each of us go back to bed. then we can let this ambitious tyrant continue unchallenged until each of us is killed at his whim. but if we have reasons that are strong enough to ignite cowards into action and to make weak women brave and i think we do then, countrymen, what else could we possibly need to spur us to action? what bond do we need other than that of discreet romans who have said what they're going to do and won't back down? and what oath do we need other than that we honest men have told each other that this will happen or we will die trying? swearing is for priests, cowards, overly cautious men, feeble old people, and those long-suffering weaklings who welcome abuse. only men whom you wouldn't trust anyway would swear oaths, and for the worst reasons. don't spoil the justness and virtue of our endeavor nor weaken our own irrepressible spirits by thinking that we need a binding oath, when the blood that every noble roman contains within him would be proven bastard's blood if he broke the smallest part of any promise he had made."], ["but what about cicero? should we see what he thinks? i think he will stand strong with us.", "let's not leave him out.", "no, by no means.", "yes, we should get his support, for his mature presence will make others think well of us and speak out in support of our actions. they'll assume that cicero, with his sound judgment, ordered the actions. his dignified maturity will distract attention from our youth and wildness.", "no, don't even mention him. we shouldn't tell him about our plans. he'll never follow anything that other men have started.", "then leave him out."], ["indeed, he's not right for this.", "but should we only go after caesar? no one else?", "good point, decius. i don't think it would be wise to let mark antony, whom caesar is so fond of, outlive caesar. we'd find that he was a dangerous plotter. and as you know, his connections, if he put them to good use, might be enough to hurt us all. to prevent this, mark antony should die along with caesar.", "our action will seem too bloody if we cut off caesar's head and then hack at his arms and legs too, caius cassius because mark antony is merely one of caesar's arms. it'll look like we killed caesar out of anger and mark antony out of envy. let's be sacrificers but not butchers, caius. we're all against what caesar stands for, and there's no blood in that. oh, how i wish we could oppose caesar's spirit his overblown ambition and not hack up caesar himself! but, unfortunately, caesar has to bleed if we're going to stop him. noble friends, let's kill him boldly but not with anger. let's carve him up like a dish fit for the gods, not chop him up like a carcass fit for dogs. let's be angry only long enough to do the deed, and then let's act like we're disgusted by what we had to do. this will make our actions seem practical and not vengeful. if we appear calm to the people, they'll call us surgeons rather than murderers. as for mark antony forget him. he'll be as useless as caesar's arm after caesar's head is cut off."], ["but i'm still afraid of him, because the deep-rooted love he has for caesar", "alas, good cassius, don't think about him. if he loves caesar, then he can only hurt himself by grieving and dying for caesar. and i'd be surprised if he even did that, for he prefers sports, fun, and friends.", "there's nothing to fear in him. let's not kill him. he'll live and laugh at this afterward.", "quiet! count how many times the clock chimes.", "the clock struck three.", "it's time to leave.", "but we still don't know whether caesar will go out in public today or not, because he's become superstitious lately, a complete turnaround from when he used to have such a bad opinion of fortune-tellers, dream interpreters, and ritual mumbo-jumbo. it might happen that these strange signs, the unusual terror of this night, and the urgings of his fortune-tellers will keep him away from the capitol today.", "don't worry about that. if he's reluctant, i can convince him. he loves to hear me tell him how men can be snared by flatterers, just like unicorns can be captured in trees, elephants in holes, and lions with nets. when i tell him he hates flatterers, he agrees, just at the moment when i'm flattering him the most. let me work on him. i can put him in the right mood, and i'll bring him to the capitol."], ["no, we'll all go there to bring him.", "by eight o'clock. is that the latest we can do it?", "let's make that the latest, but be sure to get there before then.", "caius ligarius doesn't like caesar, who berated him for speaking well of pompey. i wonder that none of you thought about getting his support.", "good metellus, go to him now. he likes me, and i've given him good reason to. just send him here, and i'll persuade him.", "the morning is approaching. we'll leave, brutus. friends, go your separate ways. but all of you, remember what you've said and prove yourselves true romans.", "good gentlemen, look like you're rested and happy. don't let our faces betray our plans. instead, carry yourselves like roman actors, with cheerful spirits and well-composed faces. and so, good morning to all of you."], ["boy! lucius! fast asleep? well, enjoy the sweetness of deep sleep. your brain isn't stuffed with the strange shapes and fantasies that come to men who are overwhelmed by worries. that's why you sleep so soundly.", "brutus, my lord.", "portia, what are you doing awake? it isn't good for your health to expose your weak body to the raw, cold morning.", "it's not good for your health, either. you rudely snuck out of bed. and last night at dinner, you got up abruptly and paced back and forth with your arms crossed, brooding and sighing, and when i asked you what was the matter, you gave me a dirty look. i asked you again, and you scratched your head and stamped your foot impatiently. i still insisted on knowing what the matter was, but you wouldn't answer me, instead giving me an angry wave of your hand and telling me to leave you alone. so i left, afraid of further provoking anger that was already inflamed but still hoping this was merely moodiness, which everyone is affected by once in awhile. your strange mood won't let you eat or talk or sleep. if it had changed your outward appearance as much as it has affected you on the inside, i wouldn't even be able to recognize you, brutus. my dear lord, tell me what's bothering you."], ["i'm not feeling well that's all.", "you're smart, though, and if you were sick, you'd take what you needed to get better.", "i'm doing so. good portia, go to bed.", "are you sick? and is it healthy to walk uncovered and breathe in the dampness of the morning? you're sick, yet you sneak out of your warm bed and let the humid and disease-infested air make you sicker? no, my brutus, you have some sickness within your mind, which by virtue of my position i deserve to know about. and on my knees, i urge you, by my once-praised beauty, by all your vows of love and that great vow of marriage which made the two of us one person, that you should reveal to me, who is one half of yourself, why you're troubled and what men have visited you tonight. for there were six or seven men here, who hid their faces even in the darkness.", "don't kneel, noble portia.", "i wouldn't need to if you were acting nobly. tell me, brutus, as your wife, aren't i supposed to be told the secrets that concern you? am i part of you only in a limited sense i get to have dinner with you, sleep with you, and talk to you sometimes?"], ["is my place only on the outskirts of your happiness? if it's nothing more than that, then i'm your whore, not your wife.", "you're my true and honorable wife, as dear to me as the blood that runs through my sad heart.", "if that were true, then i'd know your secret. i admit i'm only a woman, but nevertheless i'm the woman lord brutus took for his wife. i admit i'm only a woman, but i'm still a woman from a noble family i'm cato's daughter. do you really think i'm no stronger than the rest of my sex, with such a father and such a husband? tell me your secrets. i won't betray them. i've proved my trustworthiness by giving myself a voluntary wound here in my thigh. if i can bear that pain, then i can bear my husband's secrets.", "oh, gods, make me worthy of this noble wife!", "listen! someone knocks. portia, go inside awhile, and soon enough you'll share the secrets of my heart. i'll explain all that i have committed to do and all the reasons for my sad face. leave me quickly.", "lucius, who's that knocking?"], ["here's a sick man who wants to speak with you.", "it's caius ligarius, whom metellus spoke of. boy, stand aside. caius ligarius! how are you?", "please accept my feeble \"good morning.\"", "oh, what a time you've chosen to be sick, brave caius! how i wish you felt better!", "i'm not sick if you've prepared some honorable exploit for me.", "indeed, i would have such an exploit for you, ligarius, if you were healthy enough to hear it.", "by all the gods that romans worship, i hereby throw off my sickness! soul of rome! brave son of honorable ancestors! you've conjured up my deadened spirit like an exorcist. now say the word, and i will tackle all kinds of impossible things, and succeed too. what is there to do?", "a deed that will make sick men healthy.", "but aren't there some healthy men whom we have to make sick?", "that too. my dear caius, i'll explain the task at hand to you as we walk toward the man we must do it to."], ["start walking, and with an energized heart, i'll follow you to what, i don't know, but i'm satisfied, simply knowing that brutus leads me.", "follow me, then."], ["neither the sky nor the earth have been quiet tonight. calphurnia cried out three times in her sleep, \"help, someone! they're murdering caesar!\" who's there?", "my lord?", "go tell the priests to perform a sacrifice immediately, and bring me their interpretation of the results.", "i will, my lord.", "what are you doing, caesar? are you planning to go out? you're not leaving the house today.", "i will go out. the things that threaten me have only seen my back. when they see the face of caesar, they will vanish.", "caesar, i never believed in omens, but now they frighten me. a servant told me the night-watchmen saw horrid sights too, but different ones from what we heard and saw. a lioness gave birth in the streets, and graves cracked open and thrust out their dead."], ["fierce, fiery warriors fought in the clouds in the usual formations of war ranks and squadrons until the clouds drizzled blood onto the capitol. the noise of battle filled the air, and horses neighed, and dying men groaned, and ghosts shrieked and squealed in the streets. oh, caesar! these things are beyond anything we've seen before, and i'm afraid.", "how can we avoid what the gods want to happen? but i will go out, for these bad omens apply to the world in general as much as they do to me.", "when beggars die there are no comets in the sky. the heavens only announce the deaths of princes.", "cowards die many times before their deaths. the brave experience death only once. of all the strange things i've ever heard, it seems most strange to me that men fear death, given that death, which can't be avoided, will come whenever it wants.", "what do the priests say?", "they don't want you to go out today. they pulled out the guts of the sacrificed animal and couldn't find its heart.", "the gods do this to test my bravery. they're saying i'd be an animal without a heart if i stayed home today out of fear. so, i won't."], ["danger knows that caesar is more dangerous than he is. we're two lions born on the same day in the same litter, and i'm the older and more terrible. i will go out.", "alas, my lord, your confidence is getting the better of your wisdom. don't go out today. say that it's my fear that keeps you inside and not your own. we'll send mark antony to the senate house, and he'll say that you're sick today. let me, on my knees, win you over to this plan.", "all right. mark antony will say i'm not well, and to please you i'll stay at home.", "here's decius brutus. he'll tell them so.", "hail, caesar! good morning, worthy caesar. i've come to take you to the senate house.", "and you've come at a good time, so you can convey my greetings to the senators and tell them i won't come today. it wouldn't be true to say that i come, and even less true to say that i don't come. i simply come today. tell them so, decius.", "say he's sick.", "would i send a lie? have i accomplished so much in battle, but now i'm afraid to tell some old men the truth?"], ["decius, go tell them that caesar won't come.", "most mighty caesar, give me some reason, so i won't be laughed at when i tell them so.", "the reason is that it's what i want. i'm not coming. that's enough for the senate. but for your private satisfaction, because i love you, i'll tell you. calphurnia, my wife, is keeping me at home. last night, she dreamed she saw a statue of me with a hundred holes in it, like a fountain with pure blood flowing from it, and many happy romans came smiling and washed their hands in it. she takes these signs for warnings and predictions of terrible evils to come, and, on her knee, she begged me to stay home today.", "this dream has been interpreted all wrong. it was a good and lucky vision. your statue spouting blood through many holes, in which many smiling romans bathed, means that you'll provide great rome with sustaining blood, and that great men will strive to get some token of approval from your holy blood. this is what calphurnia's dream means.", "you've offered an excellent interpretation.", "i will have when you hear the rest of what i have to say. the senate has decided to give mighty caesar a crown today."], ["if you send them word that you won't come, they might change their minds. besides, someone's likely to joke, \"adjourn the senate until some other time, when caesar's wife has had better dreams.\" if you hide yourself, won't they whisper, \"caesar is afraid?\" pardon me, caesar. my high hopes for your advancement force me to tell you this. my love gets the better of my manners.", "how foolish your fears seem now, calphurnia! i'm ashamed that i yielded to them. give me my robe, because i'm going.", "and look, here's publius, come to fetch me.", "good morning, caesar.", "welcome, publius. what, brutus? are you up this early too? good morning, casca. caius ligarius, i was never your enemy so much as the sickness that's made you so thin. what time is it?", "caesar, the clock has struck eight.", "i thank you all for your trouble and courtesy."], ["see! even antony, who stays up all night partying, is awake. good morning, antony.", "and to you, most noble caesar.", "tell them to prepare the other room for guests. i'm to blame for making you wait for me. now, cinna. now, metellus. trebonius! i have an hour-long matter to discuss with you. remember to see me today. stay near me so i'll remember.", "caesar, i will. in fact, i'll be so near that your best friends will wish i'd been further away.", "good friends, go in and have some wine with me. and we'll leave together, like friends.", "that we are now only \"like\" friends oh caesar makes my heart ache."], ["\"caesar, beware of brutus. watch cassius. don't go near casca. keep an eye on cinna. don't trust trebonius. pay attention to metellus cimber. decius brutus doesn't love you. you've wronged caius ligarius. these men all have one intention, and it's directed against caesar. if you aren't immortal, watch those around you. a sense of security opens the door to conspiracy. i pray that the mighty gods defend you! your friend, artemidorus.\" i'll stand here until caesar passes by, and i'll give him this as though it's a petition. my heart regrets that good men aren't safe from the bite of jealous rivals. if you read this, caesar, you might live. if not, the fates are on the side of the traitors."], ["boy, i beg you to run to the senate house. don't stay to answer me get going. why are you still standing there?", "to find out what you want me to do there, madam.", "i want you there and back again before i can even tell you what you should do there. oh, let my determination keep me from speaking what is in my heart! i have a man's mind, but only a woman's strength. how hard it is for women to keep secrets! lucius are you still here?", "madam, what should i do? run to the capitol and nothing else? and then return to you and nothing else?", "yes, return and tell me if your master looks well, because he was sick when he left. and pay attention to what caesar does and which men are close to him. listen, boy! what's that noise?", "i don't hear anything, madam.", "i beg you, listen well. i heard a noise like a scuffle. the wind brings it from the capitol.", "truly, madam, i don't hear anything."], ["come here, you. where are you coming from?", "my own house, good lady.", "what time is it?", "around nine o'clock, madam.", "has caesar gone to the capital yet?", "madam, not yet. i'm going to stand so i can see him pass on the way to the capitol.", "you have some plea for caesar, don't you?", "yes, i do, lady. if it pleases caesar to be so good to himself as to hear me, i'll try to get him to do what's good for him.", "why, do you know of any harm intended toward him?", "nothing that i know for sure, but a lot that i'm afraid might happen. good morning to you. the street is narrow here. the crowd that follows caesar at his heels senators, justices, common petitioners will suffocate a feeble man almost to death. i'll move to a more open place and there speak to great caesar as he walks past."], ["i must go in. oh, a woman's heart is so weak! oh brutus, may the gods aid you in your endeavor! surely, the boy heard me. lucius brutus has a claim that caesar won't grant. oh, i feel faint. run, lucius, and speak well of me to my lord. say that i'm happy. then return to me and tell me what he says to you."], ["soothsayer march 15th has come.", "yes, caesar, but it's not gone yet.", "hail, caesar! read this schedule.", "caesar trebonius wants you to look over his humble petition, at your leisure.", "oh, caesar, read mine first, for my petition affects you more directly. read it, great caesar.", "whatever pertains to myself i will deal with last.", "don't delay, caesar. read it instantly.", "what, is the man insane?", "artemidorus stand aside, you.", "artemidorus what? are you pressing your petition on the street? go to the capitol."], ["cassius i hope your endeavor goes well today.", "what endeavor, popillius?", "good luck.", "cassius what did popillius lena say?", "brutus he wished that our endeavor would go well today. i'm afraid we've been found out.", "look, he's approaching caesar. keep an eye on him.", "casca, be quick, because we're worried we might be stopped. brutus, what will we do? if our secret's known, either caesar or i will die, for i'll kill myself.", "cassius, stand firm. popillius lena wasn't talking about our plot for, look, he's smiling, and caesar's expression is the same.", "trebonius knows his cue. see, brutus, he's pulling mark antony aside.", "where's metellus cimber? he should go up and offer his petition to caesar now."], ["they're speaking to him. go up there and second his petition.", "casca, you'll be the first to raise your hand.", "are we all ready? what problem should i discuss with you first?", "most high, most mighty, and most powerful caesar, metellus cimber kneels before you with a humble heart", "i have to stop you, cimber. these kneelings and humble courtesies might excite ordinary men, flattering them into turning roman law into children's games. but don't be so foolish as to think you can sway from what's right by using the tactics that persuade fools i mean this flattery, low bows, and puppy-like fawning. your brother has been banished by decree. if you kneel and beg and flatter for him, i'll kick you out of my way like i would a dog. know that i am not unjust, and i will not grant him a pardon without reason.", "is there no voice worthier than my own to appeal to caesar to repeal the order that my brother be banished?", "i kiss your hand, but not in flattery, caesar. i ask you to repeal publius cimber's banishment immediately."], ["what, even you, brutus?", "pardon him, caesar, pardon him. i fall to your feet to beg you to restore publius cimber to citizenship.", "i could be convinced if i were like you. if i could beg others to change their minds, begging would convince me, too. but i'm as immovable as the northern star, whose stable and stationary quality has no equal in the sky. the sky shows countless stars. they're all made of fire, and each one shines. but only one among all of them remains in a fixed position. so it is on earth. the world is full of men, and men are flesh and blood, and they are capable of reason. yet out of all of them, i know only one who is unassailable, who never moves from his position. to show you that that's me, let me prove it a little even in this case. i was firm in ordering that cimber be banished, and i remain firm in that decision.", "oh, caesar", "enough! would you try to lift mount olympus?", "great caesar", "haven't i resisted even brutus, begging from his knees?", "hands, speak for me!"], ["and you too, brutus? in that case, die, caesar.", "liberty! freedom! tyranny is dead! run and proclaim it in the streets.", "some should go to the public platforms and cry out, \"liberty, freedom, and democracy!\"", "people and senators, don't be afraid. don't run away stay where you are. only caesar had to die for his ambition.", "go to the platform, brutus.", "and cassius too.", "where's publius?", "here. he's completely stunned by this mutiny.", "stand close together, in case someone loyal to caesar tries to", "don't talk about standing together. publius, cheer up. we don't intend any harm to you, nor to anyone else. tell them this, publius."], ["and leave us, publius, in case the people storming us should harm you.", "do so. and let no one suffer for this deed except us, the perpetrators.", "where's antony?", "he ran to his house, stunned. men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run in the streets as though it were doomsday.", "we'll soon find out what fate has in store for us. all we know is that we'll die sometime, which is all anyone ever knows, though we try to draw out our days for as long as possible.", "why, the man who shortens his life by twenty years cuts off twenty years of worrying about death.", "so, then, death is a gift, and we are caesar's friends, for we've done him a service by shortening his time spent fearing death. kneel, romans, kneel, and let's wash our hands, up to the elbows, in caesar's blood and smear it on our swords. then we'll go out, even to the marketplace, and, waving our bloody swords over our heads, let's cry, \"peace, freedom, and liberty!\"", "kneel then, and wash."], ["how many years from now will this heroic scene be reenacted in countries that don't even exist yet and in languages not yet known!", "how many times will caesar bleed again in show, though he now lies at the base of pompey's statue, as worthless as dust!", "as often as it's replayed, our group will be hailed as the men who gave their country liberty.", "well, should we go out?", "yes, every man forward. brutus will lead, and we'll follow him with the boldest and best hearts of rome.", "wait a minute. who's that coming? it's a friend of antony's.", "brutus, my master ordered me to kneel like this. he ordered me to kneel low, and, from the ground, like this, he ordered me to say: \"brutus is noble, wise, brave, and honest. caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving. antony loves brutus and honors him. antony feared caesar, honored him, and loved him."], ["if brutus will swear that antony may come to him safely and be convinced that caesar deserved to be killed, mark antony will love dead caesar not nearly as much as living brutus, and with true faith he'll follow the destiny and affairs of noble brutus through the difficulties of this unprecedented state of affairs.\" that's what my master, antony, says.", "your master is a wise and honorable roman. i never thought any less of him. tell him, if he comes here, i'll explain everything to him and, on my word, he'll leave unharmed.", "i'll get him now.", "i know that he'll be on our side.", "i hope we can count on him, but i still fear him, and my hunches are usually accurate.", "but here comes antony. welcome, mark antony.", "oh, mighty caesar! do you lie so low? have all your conquests, glories, triumphs, achievements, come to so little? farewell. gentlemen, i don't know what you intend to do, who else you intend to kill, who else you consider corrupt."], ["if it's me, there's no time as good as this hour of caesar's death, and no weapon better than your swords, covered with the noblest blood in the world. i ask you, if you have a grudge against me, to kill me now, while your stained hands still reek of blood. i could live a thousand years and i wouldn't be as ready to die as i am now. there's no place i'd rather die than here by caesar, and no manner of death would please me more than being stabbed by you, the masters of this new era.", "oh, antony, don't beg us to kill you. though we seem bloody and cruel right now, with our bloody hands and this deed we've done, you've only seen our hands and their bloody business; you haven't looked into our hearts. they are full of pity for caesar. but a stronger pity, for the wrongs committed against rome, drove out our pity for caesar, as fire drives out fire, and so we killed him. for you, our swords have blunt edges, too dull to harm you, mark antony. our arms, which can be strong and cruel, and our hearts, filled with brotherly love, embrace you with kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.", "your vote will be as strong as anyone's in the reordering of the government.", "but just be patient until we've calmed the masses, who are beside themselves with fear. then we'll explain to you why i, who loved caesar even while i stabbed him, have taken this course of action."], ["i don't doubt your wisdom. each of you, give me your bloody hand. first, marcus brutus, i shake your hand. next, caius cassius, i take your hand. now, decius brutus, yours. now yours, metellus. yours, cinna. and yours, my brave casca. last but not least, yours, good trebonius. you are all gentlemen alas, what can i say? now that i've shaken your hands, you'll take me for either a coward or a flatterer in either case, my credibility stands on slippery ground. it's true that i loved you, caesar nothing could be truer. if your spirit is looking down upon us now, it must hurt you more than even your death to see your antony making peace shaking the bloody hands of your enemies in front of your corpse. if i had as many eyes as you have wounds, and they wept as fast as your wounds stream blood even that would be more becoming than joining your enemies in friendship. forgive me, julius! on this very spot you were hunted down, like a brave deer. and here you fell, where your hunters are now standing. the spot is marked by your death and stained by your blood. oh world, you were the forest to this deer, and this deer, oh world, was your dear. now you lie here, stabbed by many princes!", "mark antony", "pardon me, caius cassius. even caesar's enemies would say the same. from a friend, it's a cool assessment no more than that."], ["i don't blame you for praising caesar like this, but what agreement do you intend to reach with us? will you be counted as our friend, or should we proceed without depending on you?", "i took your hands in friendship, but, indeed, i was distracted when i looked down at caesar. i am friends with you all and love you all, on one condition that you prove to me that caesar was dangerous.", "without that proof, this would've been a savage action! our reasons are so well considered that even if you, antony, were caesar's son, you would be satisfied with them.", "that's all i ask and that you let me carry his body to the marketplace and, as a friend ought to do, stand on the platform and give a proper funeral oration.", "you may, mark antony.", "brutus, may i have a word with you? brutus you don't know what you're doing. don't let antony speak at his funeral. don't you know how much the people could be affected by what he says?", "cassius with your permission, i'll stand on the platform first and explain the reason for caesar's death."], ["what antony says, i'll announce, he says only by our permission and by our conviction that caesar should be honored with all the usual and lawful ceremonies. it'll help us more than hurt us.", "brutus i'm worried about the outcome of his speech. i don't like this plan.", "mark antony, take caesar's body. you will not blame us in your funeral speech, but will say all the good you want to about caesar and that you do it by our permission. otherwise, you'll have no role at all in his funeral. and you'll speak on the same platform as i do, after i'm done.", "so be it. i don't want anything more.", "prepare the body, then, and follow us.", "oh, pardon me, you bleeding corpse, for speaking politely and acting mildly with these butchers! you are what's left of the noblest man that ever lived. pity the hand that shed this valuable blood. over your wounds which, like speechless mouths, open their red lips, as though to beg me to speak i predict that a curse will fall upon the bodies of men."], ["fierce civil war will paralyze all of italy. blood and destruction will be so common and familiar that mothers will merely smile when their infants are cut to pieces by the hands of war. people's capacity for sympathy will grow tired and weak from the sheer quantity of cruel deeds. and caesar's ghost, searching for revenge with the goddess by his side, just up from hell, will cry in the voice of a king, \"havoc!\" and unleash the dogs of war. this foul deed will stink up to the sky with men's corpses, which will beg to be buried.", "you serve octavius caesar, right?", "i do, mark antony.", "caesar wrote for him to come to rome.", "he received caesar's letters, and he is coming. he told me to say to you caesar' oh, caesar!", "your heart is big; go ahead and weep. grief seems to be contagious, for my eyes, seeing the tears in yours, began to fill. is your master coming?", "he rests tonight within twenty-one miles of rome."], ["report back to him fast and tell him what has happened. this is now a rome in mourning, a dangerous rome. it's not safe enough for octavius yet. hurry away and tell him so. no, wait, stay a minute. don't go back until i've carried the corpse into the marketplace. there i'll use my speech to test what the people think of these bloody men's cruel action. you'll report back to young octavius how they respond. help me here."], ["we want answers. give us answers.", "then follow me and listen to my speech, friends. cassius, go to the next street and divide the crowd. let those who will hear me speak stay. lead those away who will follow you, and we'll explain publicly the reasons for caesar's death.", "i'll listen to brutus.", "i'll listen to cassius, and we will compare their reasons.", "quiet! noble brutus has mounted the platform.", "be patient until i finish. romans, countrymen, and friends! listen to my reasons and be silent so you can hear. believe me on my honor and keep my honor in mind, so you may believe me. be wise when you criticize me and keep your minds alert so you can judge me fairly. if there's anyone in this assembly, any dear friend of caesar's, i say to him that my love for caesar was no less than his. if, then, that friend demands to know why i rose up against caesar, this is my answer: it's not that i loved caesar less, but that i loved rome more."], ["would you rather that caesar were living and we would all go to our graves as slaves, or that caesar were dead and we all lived as free men? i weep for caesar in that he was good to me. i rejoice in his good fortune. i honor him for being brave. but his ambition for that, i killed him. there are tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his bravery, and death for his ambition. who here is so low that he wants to be a slave? if there are any, speak, for it is he whom i've offended. who here is so barbarous that he doesn't want to be a roman? if there are any, speak, for it is he whom i've offended. who here is so vile that he doesn't love his country? if there are any, speak, for it is he whom i have offended. i will pause for a reply.", "no one, brutus, no one.", "then i have offended no one. i've done no more to caesar than you will do to me. the reasons for his death are recorded in the capitol. his glory has not been diminished where he earned it, nor have those offenses for which he was killed been exaggerated.", "here comes his body, mourned by mark antony, who, though he had no part in the killing, will benefit from his death receiving a share in the commonwealth, as you all will. with these words i leave. just as i killed my best friend for the good of rome, so will i kill myself when my country requires my death.", "live, brutus! live, live!", "let's carry him in triumph to his house!"], ["let's build a statue of him, near those of his ancestors!", "let him become caesar!", "caesar's better qualities exist in brutus, and we will crown him.", "we'll bring him to his house with shouts and celebration!", "my countrymen", "silence! brutus speaks.", "quiet there!", "good countrymen, let me leave alone. i want you to stay here with antony to pay respects to caesar's corpse and listen to antony's speech about caesar's glories, which he gives with our permission. i ask that none of you leave, except myself, until antony has finished.", "let's stay and hear mark antony.", "let him mount the pulpit. we'll listen to him. noble antony, mount the podium.", "for brutus's sake, i am indebted to you."], ["what does he say about brutus?", "he says that for brutus's sake he finds himself indebted to us all.", "he'd better not speak badly of brutus here.", "caesar was a tyrant.", "that's for sure. we're lucky that rome is rid of him.", "quiet! let's hear what antony has to say.", "you gentle romans", "quiet there! let us hear him.", "friends, romans, countrymen, give me your attention. i have come here to bury caesar, not to praise him. the evil that men do is remembered after their deaths, but the good is often buried with them. it might as well be the same with caesar. the noble brutus told you that caesar was ambitious. if that's true, it's a serious fault, and caesar has paid seriously for it. with the permission of brutus and the others for brutus is an honorable man; they are all honorable men i have come here to speak at caesar's funeral. he was my friend, he was faithful and just to me. but brutus says he was ambitious, and brutus is an honorable man. he brought many captives home to rome whose ransoms brought wealth to the city."], ["is this the work of an ambitious man? when the poor cried, caesar cried too. ambition shouldn't be so soft. yet brutus says he was ambitious, and brutus is an honorable man. you all saw that on the lupercal feast day i offered him a king's crown three times, and he refused it three times. was this ambition? yet brutus says he was ambitious. and, no question, brutus is an honorable man. i am not here to disprove what brutus has said, but to say what know. you all loved him once, and not without reason. then what reason holds you back from mourning him now? men have become brutish beasts and lost their reason! bear with me. my heart is in the coffin there with caesar, and i must pause until it returns to me.", "i think there's a lot of sense in what he says.", "if you think about it correctly, caesar has suffered a great wrong.", "has he, sirs? i'm worried there will be someone worse to replace him.", "did you hear antony? caesar wouldn't take the crown. therefore it's certain that he wasn't ambitious.", "if it turns out he wasn't, certain people are going to get it.", "poor man! antony's eyes are fiery red from crying.", "there isn't a nobler man than antony in all of rome."], ["now listen, he's going to speak again.", "only yesterday the word of caesar might have stood against the world. now he lies there worth nothing, and no one is so humble as to show him respect. oh, sirs, if i stirred your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage, i would offend brutus and cassius, who, you all know, are honorable men. i will not do them wrong. i would rather wrong the dead, and wrong myself and you, than wrong such honorable men. but here's a paper with caesar's seal on it. i found it in his room it's his will. if you could only hear this testament which, excuse me, i don't intend to read aloud you would kiss dead caesar's wounds and dip your handkerchiefs in his sacred blood, and beg for a lock of hair to remember him by. and when you died, you would mention the handkerchief or the hair in your will, bequeathing it to your heirs like a rich legacy.", "we want to hear the will. read it, mark antony.", "the will, the will! we want to hear caesar's will.", "be patient, gentle friends, i must not read it. it isn't proper for you to know how much caesar loved you. you aren't wood, you aren't stones you're men. and, being men, the contents of caesar's will would enrage you. it's better that you don't know you're his heirs, for if you knew, just imagine what would come of it!"], ["read the will. we want to hear it, antony. you have to read us the will, caesar's will.", "will you be patient? will you wait awhile? i've said too much in telling you of it. i'm afraid that i wrong the honorable men whose daggers have stabbed caesar.", "they were traitors. \"honorable men!\"", "the will! the testament!", "they were villains, murderers. the will! read the will!", "you force me to read the will, then? then make a circle around caesar's corpse, and let me show you the man who made this will. shall i come down? will you let me?", "come down.", "descend.", "we'll let you.", "make a circle; stand around him.", "stand away from the hearse. stand away from the body.", "make room for antony, most noble antony!"], ["no, don't press up against me. stand further away.", "stand back. give him room.", "if you have tears, prepare to shed them now. you all know this cloak. i remember the first time caesar ever put it on. it was a summer's evening; he was in his tent. it was the day he overcame the nervii warriors. look, here's where cassius's dagger pierced it. see the wound that casca made. through this hole beloved brutus stabbed. and when he pulled out his cursed dagger, see how caesar's blood came with it, as if rushing out a door to see if it was really brutus who was knocking so rudely. for brutus, as you know, was caesar's angel. the gods know how dearly caesar loved him! this was the most unkind cut of all. for when the noble caesar saw him stab, he understood his beloved brutus's ingratitude; it was stronger than the violence of traitors, and it defeated him, bursting his mighty heart. and at the base of pompey's statue, with his cloak covering his face, which was dripping with blood the whole time, great caesar fell. oh, what a fall it was, my countrymen! then you and i and all of us fell down, while bloody treason triumphed. oh, now you weep, and i sense that you feel pity. these are gracious tears. but if it overwhelms you to look at caesar's wounded cloak, how will you feel, kind men, now? look at this, here is the man scarred, as you can see, by traitors. caesar'"], ["oh, what a sad sight!", "oh, noble caesar!", "oh, sad day!", "oh, traitors, villains!", "oh, most bloody sight!", "we will get revenge.", "revenge! let's go after them! seek! burn! set fire! kill! slay! leave no traitors alive!", "wait, countrymen.", "quiet there! listen to the noble antony.", "we'll listen to him, we'll follow him, we'll die with him.", "good friends, sweet friends, don't let me stir you up to such a sudden mutiny. those who have done this deed are honorable. i don't know what private grudges they had that made them do it. they're wise and honorable, and will no doubt give you reasons for it. i haven't come to steal your loyalty, friends. i'm no orator, as brutus is. i'm only, as you know, a plain, blunt man who loved his friend, and the men who let me speak know this well. i have neither cleverness nor rhetorical skill nor the authority nor gesture nor eloquence nor the power of speech to stir men up. i just speak directly. i tell you what you already know. i show you sweet caesar's wounds poor, speechless mouths! and make them speak for me. but if i were brutus and brutus were me, then i'd stir you up, and install in each of caesar's wounds the kind of voice that could convince even stones to rise up and mutiny."], ["we'll mutiny.", "we'll burn brutus's house.", "let's go, then! come, find the conspirators!", "wait, and listen to me, countrymen.", "quiet! wait! listen to antony. most noble antony!", "why, friends, you don't even know what you're doing yet. what has caesar done to deserve your love? alas, you don't know. i must tell you then. you've forgotten the will i told you about.", "yes! the will! let's stay and hear the will!", "here's the will, written under caesar's seal. to every roman citizen he gives to every individual man seventy-five drachmas.", "most noble caesar! we'll revenge his death.", "oh, royal caesar!", "listen to me patiently."], ["quiet, there!", "also, he's left you all his walkways in his private gardens and newly planted orchards on this side of the tiber river. he's left them to you and to your heirs forever public pleasures in which you will be able to stroll and relax. here was a caesar! when will there be another like him?", "never, never. let's go! we'll burn his body in the holy place and use the brands to set the traitors' houses on fire. take up the body.", "we'll start a fire.", "we'll use benches for wood", "and windowsills, anything.", "now, let it work. trouble, you have begun take whatever course you choose!", "what's up, my man?", "sir, octavius has already arrived in rome.", "where is he?", "he and lepidus are at caesar's house."], ["i will go straight to visit him. i ask for him, and he comes. fortune is happy today and, in this mood, will give us anything we want.", "i heard octavius say that brutus and cassius have ridden like madmen through the gates of rome.", "they probably received warning about how much i stirred up the people. take me to octavius."], ["i dreamed last night that i feasted with caesar, and unlucky signs overwhelmed my imagination. i have no desire to go outside, yet something leads me there.", "what's your name?", "where are you going?", "where do you live?", "are you a married man or a bachelor?", "answer all of us, now.", "yes, and be brief.", "yes, and be wise.", "yes, and be truthful, if you know what's good for you.", "what's my name? where am i going? where do i live? am i a married man or a bachelor? then, to answer every man briefly, wisely, and truthfully wisely i say, i am a bachelor.", "you imply that married men are fools. you'll get a blow from me for that, i think. go on with what you were saying right this instant.", "right this instant, i'm going to caesar's funeral."], ["as a friend or an enemy?", "as a friend.", "he answered that question straight.", "as for where you live, tell us quickly get to the point.", "getting right to the point, i live near the capitol.", "tell us your name, sir, truthfully.", "truthfully, my name is cinna.", "tear him to pieces. he's a conspirator.", "i am cinna the poet, i am cinna the poet!", "tear him apart for his bad verses, tear him up!", "i'm not cinna the conspirator.", "it doesn't matter. his name's cinna. pull only his name out of his heart and let him go.", "tear him apart, tear him up!", "come, firebrands, over here! to brutus's, to cassius's, let's burn them all. some of you go to decius's house and some to casca's. some to ligarius's. go!"], ["these ones, then, will be assassinated. their names are marked.", "lepidus your brother has to die too. do you agree, lepidus?", "i agree", "put a mark next to his name too, antony.", "on the condition that your sister's son, publius, also must die, mark antony.", "he will die. see i've sealed his fate with this mark next to his name. but, lepidus, go to caesar's house. bring his will here, and we'll figure out a way to reduce his bequests to the people.", "will you be here when i return?", "either here or at the capitol.", "he's an unremarkable man, fit only to be sent on errands. does it really make sense, once we divide the world into three parts, that he should be one of the three rulers?"], ["you thought it made sense, and you listened to him about who should be marked to die in these harsh death sentences.", "octavius, i'm older than you are. and although we're giving these honors to this man so that he shares some of the blame for what we're doing, he'll carry these honors like a jackass carries gold groaning and sweating under the load, either led or pushed, as we direct him. once he's carried our treasure where we want it, we'll free him of the load and turn him loose like a jackass, to shake his ears and graze in the public pastures.", "you can do what you want, but he's an experienced and honorable soldier.", "so is my horse, octavius, and for that reason i give him all the hay he wants. but my horse is a creature that teach to fight to turn, to stop, to run in a straight line. i govern the motion of his body. and in some ways, lepidus is just like that. he has to be taught and trained and told to go forward. he's an empty man, who pays attention to fashions and tastes that other men took up and got tired of long ago. don't think about lepidus except as a means to an end. and now, octavius, listen to more important things. brutus and cassius are raising armies. we have to raise our own immediately. so, we should combine forces and organize our allies, pull together our friends, and stretch our resources as far as they'll go."], ["let's immediately organize a council to discuss the best way to find out their secrets and the safest way to confront the threats we're already faced with.", "let's do that, because we're hemmed in by many enemies. and even some of the people who smile at us are in fact plotting against us, i'm afraid."], ["stop.", "pass on the command to halt!", "what's happening now, lucillius? is cassius nearby?", "he's nearby, and pindarus has come to salute you on behalf of his master.", "he sends his greetings through a good man. your master, pindarus, either because he's changed his mind or been influenced by bad officers, has made me wish we hadn't done some of the things we did. if he's nearby, i want an explanation.", "i have no doubt that my noble master will prove himself to be what he is: honorable and noble.", "i don't doubt him. can i have a word with you, lucillius? lucillius tell me how cassius treated you. put my mind at rest.", "he received me with courtesy and sufficient respect, but not with affection, nor with as much open and friendly conversation as he once greeted me.", "you've described a warm friend who's cooling off. remember this, lucillius. when a friend starts to get sick of you, he treats you artificially. plain and simple loyalty doesn't make anyone act phony. but insincere men, like horses who are too lively at the start of a race, make a big show of their spirit."], ["but when push comes to shove, they droop like those horses that are all show and slow to a crawl. is his army approaching?", "they plan to spend the night in sardis. the larger part, the main body of cavalry, are coming with cassius.", "look! he's arrived. march to meet him at a dignified pace.", "halt.", "halt! pass the order along.", "halt!", "halt!", "halt!", "most noble brother, you have done me wrong.", "let the gods judge me! do i mistreat even my enemies? no. so how could i possibly wrong a brother?"], ["brutus, your sober expression is a mask to hide the fact that you've wronged me. and when you do", "cassius, calm down. we know each other well, and you can speak your grievances quietly. let's not argue here in front of both our armies, which ought to see nothing but love between us. order them to move back. then, in my tent, you can elaborate on your complaints, and i'll listen.", "pindarus, order our commanders to lead their charges a little ways away from this ground.", "lucillius, you do the same, and don't allow anyone to come into our tent until we've finished our conference. have lucius and titinius guard the door."], ["my evidence that you have wronged me is that you condemned and disgraced lucius pella for taking bribes here from the sardinians, and you ignored my letters, where i argued that he was innocent; i know the man.", "you wronged yourself to write on behalf of such a man.", "in a time like this, it doesn't make sense to criticize every offense.", "i'll tell you, cassius, you yourself have been called greedy and been accused of giving your positions to undeserving men in exchange for gold.", "me, \"greedy\"! you know, if you were anyone other than brutus, that speech would be your last.", "the name of cassius gives credit to these corrupt actions, and so they go unpunished.", "unpunished!", "remember march, march 15th. didn't great caesar bleed for the sake of justice?"], ["who among us stabbed him for any cause but justice? what did one of us strike down the most powerful man in the world in order to support robbers? should we now dirty our fingers with lowly bribes and sell the mighty offices that we hold for whatever money we can get our hands on? i'd rather be a dog and howl at the moon than be that kind of roman.", "brutus, do not provoke me. i will not take it. you're forgetting yourself when you back me into a corner. i'm a soldier, more experienced than you, and better able to give orders.", "get lost! you are not, cassius.", "i am.", "i say you're not.", "don't provoke me any further or i'll forget to restrain myself. if you care about your health, you won't push me any further.", "leave, you little man.", "is this possible?", "listen to me, for i have something to tell you. am i required to indulge your rash anger? does a madman scare me when he stares at me?", "oh gods, oh gods! must i endure all this?"], ["\"all this\"? yes, and more. go ahead rage till your proud heart breaks. show your slaves how mad you are, and make your servants tremble. but me am i going to cower at you and your irritable moods? you'll have to swallow your own poison till it makes you burst before i'm going to respond; from now on, i'll make you the butt of my jokes whenever you get sharp with me.", "has it come to this?", "you say you're a better soldier. show it! make your boasts come true, and i'll be thrilled. i'm always happy to hear about brave men.", "you wrong me in every way. you wrong me, brutus. i said an soldier, not a better one. did i say \"better\"?", "if you did, i don't care.", "when caesar was alive, even he wouldn't dare anger me like this.", "oh, be quiet. you wouldn't have dared to tempt him so.", "i wouldn't have dared!", "no.", "what? not dared to tempt him?"], ["you wouldn't have dared, out of fear for your life.", "don't take my love for granted. i might do something i'll be sorry for.", "you've already done something you should be sorry for. your threats don't scare me, cassius, because i'm so secure in my honesty and integrity that they pass me by like a weak breeze. i asked you for a certain amount of gold, which you wouldn't give me. i myself can't raise money by unethical means. i'd rather turn my heart into money and my drops of blood into coins than use crooked tactics to wring petty cash from the hardworking hands of peasants. i asked you for gold to pay my soldiers, and you wouldn't give it to me. was that the caius cassius that i knew? and would i have ever done that to you? if i ever get so greedy that i hoard such petty cash from my friends, may the gods dash me to pieces with their thunderbolts!", "i didn't refuse you.", "you did.", "i didn't. the man who brought my answer to you was a fool. you have broken my heart. a friend should put up with his friend's weaknesses, but you exaggerate mine.", "i don't until you practice them on me."], ["you don't love me.", "i don't like your faults.", "a friend would never see those faults.", "no, a flatterer wouldn't, even if the faults were as huge as mount olympus.", "come, antony and young octavius! get your revenge on cassius, because cassius has grown tired of the world. he's hated by someone he loves, defied by his brother, rebuked like a servant, all his faults observed, catalogued in a notebook, read, and committed to memory so they can be thrown in his face. oh, i could weep my soul right out of myself! there's my dagger brutus , and here's my bare chest. inside it is a heart more valuable than silver mine and richer than gold. if you're a roman, take my heart out. i, who denied you gold, will give you my heart. strike as you did at caesar, for i know even when you hated him the most, you still loved him better than you ever loved me.", "put away your dagger. be angry whenever you like, it's all right with me. do whatever you want, and i'll say your insults are just a bad mood. oh, cassius, you're partners with a quiet lamb. my anger is like a flint striking a brief spark, and then i'm cold again."], ["have i lived this long only to be the butt of a joke whenever you're angry or frustrated?", "when i said that, i was angry too.", "you admit it, then? give me your hand.", "and my heart too.", "oh, brutus!", "what's the matter?", "do you have enough love for me to be patient when my bad temper, which i inherited from my mother, makes me forget how i should behave?", "yes, cassius. and from now on, when you get hot with me, i'll assume it's your mother speaking and leave it at that.", "let me in to see the generals. there's a grudge between them, and it isn't a good idea for them to be alone.", "you can't see them.", "you'd have to kill me to stop me."], ["what's this! what's the matter?", "you should be ashamed, generals! what do you think you're doing? love each other and be friends, like two such men should be. listen to me, because i'm older than you, surely.", "ha ha! this man's rhymes are terrible!", "poet get out of here, you! get away, you rude fellow!", "be patient with him, brutus. that's just how he is.", "i'll humor him when he learns how to behave. what should we do with all these rhyming fools that follow us from post to post? get out of here, my friend.", "away, away, be gone.", "lucillius and titinius, order the commanders to have the men camp for the night.", "and return to us immediately, bringing messala with you.", "lucius, bring a bowl of wine.", "i didn't think you could even be so angry."], ["oh cassius, i'm tired out by many sorrows.", "you're forgetting your philosophy if you allow chance misfortunes to upset you.", "no one bears sorrow better than me. portia is dead.", "portia!", "she is dead.", "how did you manage not to kill me when we argued just now? what an irreplaceable and grievous loss! what sickness did she die of?", "she was worried about my absence, and about the fact that young octavius and mark antony have grown so strong which i found out at the same time as the news of her death. she became full of despair and, when her attendants were away, swallowed burning coals.", "and that's how she died?", "yes, like that.", "oh, immortal gods!"], ["don't talk about her anymore. give me a bowl of wine. with this toast i bury all bad feelings between us, cassius.", "my heart is thirsty for that noble promise. fill my cup, lucius, until the wine overflows it. i cannot drink too much of brutus's love.", "come in, titinius! welcome, good messala. now let's sit closely around this candle and discuss our needs.", "portia, are you really gone?", "no more about that, please. messala, i have received these letters explaining that young octavius and mark antony are rushing toward philippi and bearing down upon us with a mighty power.", "i have received letters that say the same.", "and anything else?", "that with a series of legal writs, octavius, antony, and lepidus have put a hundred senators to death."], ["on that point, our letters don't agree. my letters say only seventy senators were killed, one being cicero.", "cicero too?", "cicero is dead, by their decree. brutus have you received letters from your wife, my lord?", "no, messala.", "and you haven't heard any news about her in your letters?", "nothing, messala.", "i think that's strange.", "why do you ask? have you heard something of her in your letters?", "no, my lord.", "now, as you're a roman, tell me the truth.", "then you must take the truth i have to tell like a roman. it's certain that she is dead, and she died in a strange way.", "well, good-bye, portia. we all must die, messala. having already thought about the fact that she would have to die sometime, i can endure her death now.", "that's the way great men ought to endure great losses."], ["i've practiced stoicism with as much devotion as you, but i still couldn't bear this news like you do.", "well, let's move on to our work with the living. what do you think of marching to philippi immediately?", "i don't think it's a good idea.", "why not?", "here's why: it'd be better for the enemy to come after us. that way, he'll waste his provisions and tire out his soldiers, weakening his own capacities, while we, lying still, are rested, energetic, and nimble.", "your reasons are good, but i have better reasons for doing the opposite. the people who live between here and philippi are loyal to us only because we force them to be. we made them contribute to our efforts against their will. the enemy, marching past them, will add them to its numbers, then come at us refreshed, newly reinforced, and full of courage. thus we must cut him off from this advantage. if we meet him at philippi, these people will be at our backs.", "listen to me, good brother.", "begging your pardon, i'll continue what i was saying. you must also take into account that we've gotten as much from our friends as they can give. our regiments are full to the brim; our cause is ready. the enemy gets larger each day. we, now at our largest, can only decrease. there's a tidal movement in men's affairs. seizing the highest tide leads on to fortune. if high tide is let to pass, all the rest of the voyage of their lives will be marked by difficulty and misery. it's on such a high tide that we're now floating, and we must take the current when it is offered, or lose our campaign."], ["if that's what you want, all right. we'll go forward with you and meet them at philippi.", "it's now late at night, and actions must accommodate bodily needs, which we'll satisfy with only a short rest. that's all there is to say.", "there's nothing else. good night. we'll rise and leave early tomorrow.", "lucius!", "my nightgown.", "farewell, good messala. good night, titinius. noble, noble cassius, good night and sleep well.", "oh my dear brother! this was a bad start to the night. let's pray that we never come into conflict like that again. let's not, brutus."], ["everything's fine.", "good night, my lord.", "good night, good brother.", "good night, lord brutus.", "farewell, everyone.", "give me the gown. where's your lute?", "here in the tent.", "what, are you sleepy? poor boy, i don't blame you; you've stayed awake too long. call claudio and some of my other men. i'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.", "varrus and claudio!", "did you call, my lord?", "sirs, i ask you to sleep in my tent. i might wake you up in a while to send you on an errand to my brother cassius.", "if you like, we'll stand by and wait to do whatever you need."], ["no, please, lie down, good sirs, because i might change my mind. look, lucius, here's the book i was searching for. i put it in the pocket of my nightgown.", "i was sure that you hadn't given it to me.", "bear with me, good boy. i've become very forgetful. can you stay awake a bit longer and play a few tunes on your lute?", "yes, my lord, if you would like.", "i would, my boy. i ask too much of you, but you're always willing.", "it's my duty, sir.", "i shouldn't make you do more than you're able. i know that young men look forward to their rest.", "i've already slept, my lord.", "that was good planning, and you'll sleep some more. i won't keep you very long. if i live through this, i'll be good to you.", "this is a sleepy tune. oh, deadening sleep, have you taken over my boy who plays music for you? gentle boy, good night. i won't trouble you so much as to wake you. if you were to droop down, you'd break your instrument, and so i'll take it from you. good night, good boy. let me see, let me see. didn't i turn down the page where i left off reading? here it is, i think. this candle doesn't give much light."], ["what! who goes there? i think it's my bad eyesight that's making me see this horrible vision. it's coming toward me. are you real? are you a god, an angel, or a devil, that you make my blood turn cold and my hair stand up? tell me what you are.", "i'm your evil spirit, brutus.", "why do you come here?", "to tell you that you'll see me at philippi.", "then i'll see you again?", "yes, at philippi.", "alright, then i'll see you at philippi.", "just as you go, i find the courage to talk to you. evil spirit, i want to talk some more. boy, lucius! varrus! claudio! sirs, awake! claudio!", "my lord, the strings are out of tune."], ["he thinks he's still playing his instrument. lucius, wake up!", "my lord?", "were you dreaming, lucius? is that why you cried out?", "my lord, i don't think i cried out.", "yes, you did. did you see anything?", "nothing, my lord.", "go back to sleep, lucius. claudio! varrus you there, wake up!", "my lord?", "my lord?", "why did you cry out in your sleep?", "did we, my lord?", "yes. did you see anything?", "no, my lord, i didn't see anything.", "me neither, my lord."], ["go to my brother cassius. order him to advance his forces first thing, and we'll follow.", "yes, my lord."], ["now, antony, our prayers have been answered. you said the enemy wouldn't come down but keep to the hills and upper regions. it seems not. their forces are nearby. they intend to challenge us here at philippi, responding to our challenge before we've even challenged him.", "i know how they think, and i understand why they're doing this. they really wish they were somewhere else, but they want to descend on us, looking fierce so we'll think they're brave. but they aren't.", "prepare yourselves, generals. the enemy approaches with great display. they show their bloody heralds of battle, and something must be done immediately.", "octavius, lead your forces slowly out to the left side of the level field.", "i'll go to the right side. you stay on the left.", "why are you defying me in this urgent matter?"], ["i'm not defying you, but it's what i'm going to do.", "they've stopped. they want to talk.", "stay here, titinius. we have to go out and talk to them.", "mark antony, should we give the signal to attack?", "no, octavius caesar, we'll respond to their charge. go forward. the generals want to speak with us.", "don't move until we give the signal.", "words before fighting. is that how it is, countrymen?", "not that we love words more than fighting, like you do.", "good words are better than bad strokes, octavius.", "brutus, you give a nice speech along with your evil strokes. think of the hole you made in caesar's heart when you cried, \"long live caesar! hail caesar!\"", "antony, we don't yet know what kind of blows you can inflict. but your words are as sweet as honey you've stolen from the bees and left them with nothing."], ["i took their stings too, wouldn't you say?", "oh, yes, and you've left them silent too, because you stole their buzzing, antony. you very wisely warn us before you sting.", "villains, you didn't do even that much when your vile daggers struck each other as they hacked up caesar's sides. you smiled like apes and fawned like dogs and bowed like servants, kissing caesar's feet. and all the while, damned casca, like a dog, struck caesar on the neck from behind. oh, you flatterers!", "flatterers! now, brutus, you have only yourself to thank. antony wouldn't be here to offend us today if you'd listened to me earlier.", "come, come, let's remember why we're here. if arguing makes us sweat, the real trial will turn that water to blood. look: i draw my sword against conspirators. when do you think i'll put it away? never, until caesar's thirty-three wounds are well avenged, or until i too have been killed by you.", "caesar, you're not going to be killed by a traitor unless you kill yourself..", "i hope you're right. i wasn't born to die on your sword.", "if you were the noblest of your family, young man, you couldn't die more honorably."], ["an annoying schoolboy, unworthy of such an honor, joined by a masquerader and a partier!", "still the same old cassius!", "come antony, let's go. traitors, we defy you. if you dare to fight today, come to the field. if not, come when you have the courage.", "now let the wind blow, waves swell, and ships sink! the storm has begun and everything is at stake.", "lucillius! i'd like a word with you.", "my lord?", "messala!", "what is it, my general?", "messala, today is my birthday i was born on this very day. give me your hand, messala. you'll be my witness that i've been forced, as pompey was, to wager all of our freedoms on one battle."], ["you know that i used to believe in epicurus and his disregard for omens. i've changed my mind now and partly believe in omens. traveling from sardis, two mighty eagles fell on our front flag and perched there, eating from the hands of the soldiers who'd accompanied us to philippi. this morning, they've flown away and in their place are ravens, crows, and kites, flying over our heads and looking down on us, as though we were sickly prey. their shadows are like a deadly canopy, under which our army lies, ready to die.", "don't believe in this.", "i only partly believe it, for i'm enthusiastic and resolved to meet all dangers without wavering.", "lucillius right, lucillius.", "now, most noble brutus, the gods are friendly with us today so that we, who want peace, can live on to old age! but since the affairs of men are always uncertain, let's think about the worst that may happen. if we lose this battle, this is the last time we'll speak to each other. if we lose, what do you plan to do?"], ["by the same principle that made me condemn cato for committing suicide, i plan to be patient and submit to what the gods decide. i don't know why, but i find it cowardly and vile to kill oneself early to prevent possible suffering later on.", "then if we lose this battle, you'll be willing to be led in chains through the streets of rome?", "no, cassius, no. don't imagine that i'll ever allow myself to return to rome in chains. my mind is too great for that. but today, the work that march 15th began must end, and i don't know if we'll meet again. therefore, accept my everlasting farewell. forever and forever, farewell, cassius! if we meet again, then we'll smile. if not, then this parting was well done.", "forever and forever, farewell, brutus! if we meet again, then we'll smile indeed. if not, it's true, this parting was well done.", "well, lead on. oh, i wish i could know what will happen today before it happens! but it's enough to know that the day will end, and then the end will be known. come! let's go!"], ["ride, ride, messala, ride, and give these dispatches to our forces on the other side.", "they should advance immediately, because i sense octavius's side is a bit fainthearted right now, and a sudden push would overthrow him. ride, ride, messala. let cassius's wing mount a surprise attack."], ["oh, look, titinius, look! those villains, our soldiers, flee! i've become an enemy to my own soldiers! this standard-bearer here of mine was running away, so i killed him and took the flag from him.", "oh, cassius, brutus gave the orders too soon. having an advantage over octavius, he took it too eagerly, and his soldiers began looting, and now we're surrounded by antony's men.", "retreat further, my lord, retreat further. mark antony is in your tents, my lord. therefore you must run, noble cassius.", "this hill is far enough. look, look, titinius. are those my tents on fire?", "they are, my lord.", "titinius, if you love me, get on your horse and spur him on until he's brought you to those troops and back again, so that i can find out whether those troops are friends or enemies."], ["i'll be back quicker than you can think a thought.", "go, pindarus, climb a little higher on this hill. my eyesight has always been bad. watch titinius and tell me what you see in the field.", "today was the day i breathed my first breath. time has come round, and i'll end where i began. my life has run its circle. pindarus what can you see, boy?", "oh, my lord!", "what news?", "titinius is surrounded by horsemen who are quickly approaching him, yet he spurs onward. now they're almost on him. now, titinius! now some dismount. oh, he gets down too. he's taken.", "and listen! they shout for joy.", "come down, look no more. oh, i'm such a coward for living long enough to see my best friend taken before my eyes!"], ["come here, boy. i took you prisoner in parthia, and at that time i made you swear to try to do whatever i ordered you to, except take your own life. come now, keep your oath. pindarus now you'll be a free man. take this good sword, which ran through caesar's bowels, and plunge it in my chest. don't hesitate. here, take the handle, and when my face is covered as it is now, use the sword.", "caesar, you are revenged with the very same sword that killed you.", "so i'm free. but i didn't want to be free like this. oh, cassius, i'll run far from this country to where no romans can find me.", "the armies have merely changed places, titinius, because octavius has been overthrown by noble brutus's forces at the very moment that antony overthrew cassius's legions.", "this news will comfort cassius.", "where did you leave him?"], ["on this hill and in despair, with his slave pindarus.", "isn't that him on the ground?", "he doesn't seem to be alive. oh, my heart!", "isn't that him?", "no, it him, messala, but cassius is no more. just as the sun's rays turn red when it sets, so cassius has ended his life in a pool of red blood. the sun of rome has set! our day is over. clouds, dew, and dangers approach. we're finished! he didn't believe i would ever return on my mission, and so he killed himself.", "yes, he killed himself because he thought we'd lost the whole battle. sadness, which misconstrues reality, gave birth to his errors in thinking and then destroyed him.", "pindarus! where are you, pindarus?", "look for him, titinius, while i go to meet the noble brutus and force him to hear this news. i say \"force\" because brutus would rather i stuck sharp blades and poisoned arrows in his ears than fill them with this."], ["hurry, messala, and i'll look for pindarus in the meantime.", "why did you send me out, brave cassius? didn't i meet up with your allies? and didn't they place the wreath of victory on my brow and order me to give it to you? didn't you hear their shouts? alas, you misunderstood everything! but let me place this wreath on your head. your brutus ordered me to give it to you, and i'll do what he says. cassius brutus, come this way and see how much i admired caius cassius. with your permission, gods, this is a roman's duty. come, cassius's sword, and strike titinius's heart. cassius", "where is his body, messala?", "over there, where titinius mourns it.", "titinius is lying face-up.", "he's been killed.", "oh, julius caesar, you are still powerful. your ghost walks the earth and turns our swords toward our own stomachs."], ["brave titinius! look, he even put the crown on dead cassius!", "could you have found two romans as good as these two? good-bye to you, the last of all the romans. rome will never produce your equal. friends, i owe more tears to this dead man than you will see me shed. i will find the time to cry for you, cassius, i'll find the time. come, then, and send his body to thasos. we won't have his funeral at our camp, because it might make us too sad to fight. lucillius, come. and come, young cato. let's proceed to the field. labio and flavio, push our armies onward. it is three o'clock, and, romans, before night, we will try our luck in a second battle."], ["keep on, countrymen. oh, keep your heads up, even now!", "who is so low that he wouldn't? who will advance with me? i will proclaim my name around the field. i am the son of marcus cato! an enemy to tyrants and a friend to my country. i am the son of marcus cato!", "and i am brutus, marcus brutus. brutus, my country's friend. know that i am brutus!", "oh, young and noble cato, have you been slain? why, you die now as bravely as titinius. and you, being cato's son, will be honored.", "lucillius surrender or you will die.", "i'd rather die. here is some money for you to kill me immediately. kill brutus and be honored by the killing.", "we must not. he is a noble prisoner!"], ["make room! tell antony that brutus has been taken.", "i'll tell him the news. oh, here comes the general brutus has been caught, brutus is taken, my lord.", "where is he?", "he's safe, antony. i can assure you that no enemy will ever take the noble brutus alive. the gods protect him from so great a shame! when you do find him, alive or dead, he'll be found on his own terms.", "soldiers this isn't brutus, friend, but, i assure you, he is a valuable prize. keep this man safe. be kind to him. i would rather have such men as friends than enemies. move on, find out if brutus is alive or dead, then return to octavius's tent to tell us what you've learned."], ["come, last of my friends, rest on this rock.", "statilius waved the torchlight at us, but he hasn't come back. he's been captured or killed.", "sit down, clitus. killed, most likely it's become a trend. listen, clitus. clitus", "who, me, my lord? no, not for all the world.", "silence, then! don't give it away.", "i'd rather kill myself.", "listen, dardanius. dardanius", "would i dare do something like that?", "oh dardanius!", "oh clitus!", "dardanius what awful thing did brutus ask of you?", "clitus to kill him, clitus. look, he's meditating on what to do."], ["dardanius that noble man is so full of grief that it spills out of his eyes.", "come here, good volumnius. listen a minute.", "what is it, my lord?", "just this, volumnius. the ghost of caesar has appeared to me at night twice. once at sardis and once last night, here in philippi fields. i know that my hour has come.", "no, it hasn't, my lord.", "no, i'm sure it has, volumnius. you see how the world goes, volumnius. our enemies have driven us to the edge of the grave.", "it's nobler to leap in ourselves than dawdle until they push us. good volumnius, you know that we went to school together. for the sake of our old friendship, i ask you, hold my sword handle while i run on it.", "that's not a job for a friend, my lord.", "run, run, my lord. we can't wait here."], ["farewell to you, and you, and you, volumnius. strato, you've slept this whole time. farewell to you too, strato. countrymen, my heart rejoices that in all my life i knew no men who were untrue to me. i'll have glory in this losing day more than octavius and mark antony will gain by their foul conquest. so farewell, all, for my tongue has almost finished with its life. i can't see ahead of me. my bones want to rest after helping me up to this hour.", "run, my lord, run.", "go on! i'll follow.", "i beg you, strato, stay by me. you're a man with a good reputation. your life has had honor in it. then, hold my sword and turn your face away while i run on it. will you, strato?", "give me your hand, first. brutus farewell, my lord."], ["farewell, good strato. caesar, you can rest now. i didn't kill you half as willingly.", "what man is that?", "my master's man. strato, where's your master?", "free from the bondage you are in, messala. the conquerors can only make a fire of him, because only brutus triumphed over himself, and no other man gets to triumph in his death.", "it's fitting that brutus be found like this. thank you, brutus, for proving my prediction true.", "i'll take all who served brutus into my service. you, will you join with me?", "yes, if messala recommends me to you.", "do so, good messala.", "how did my master die, strato?", "i held the sword and he ran on it.", "then take this man into your service, octavius, for he did the final service to my master."], ["this was the noblest roman of them all. all the rest of the conspirators acted out of jealousy of great caesar. only he acted from honesty and for the general good. his life was gentle, and the elements mixed so well in him that nature might stand up and say to all the world, \"this was a man.\"", "let's treat him according to his virtue, with all the respect and rituals of burial. his body will lie in my tent tonight, with the honorable observance that suits a soldier. so order the armies to rest, and let's go home to share the glories of this happy day."]], [["i thought the king preferred the duke of albany to the duke of cornwall.", "we used to think so too. but the way he's divided the kingdom recently, nobody can tell which of the dukes he favors more. he's split the kingdom so evenly that it's impossible to see any indication of favoritism.", "edmund isn't this your son, my lord?", "yes, i've been responsible for his upbringing. i've had to acknowledge that he's my son so many times that now i can do it without embarrassment.", "i can't conceive of what you mean.", "you can't conceive? well, this guy's mother could conceive him all to well. she grew a big belly and had a baby for her crib before she had a husband for her bed. do you smell something naughty?", "well, i wouldn't want to undo the naughtiness, since the boy turned out so well.", "but i have a legitimate son a few years older than this one, and i don't love him any more than i love my bastard. edmund may have snuck into the world a little before his time, but his mother was pretty, we had a fun time making him, and now i have to acknowledge the guy as my son. do you know this gentleman, edmund?"], ["no, i don't, my lord.", "edmund this is lord kent. remember him as my friend and an honorable man.", "very pleased to meet you, my lord.", "i look forward to getting to know you better.", "i'll try to make myself worth your knowledge.", "he's been gone for nine years and he's leaving again soon.", "the king is coming.", "go escort the lords of france and burgundy, gloucester.", "yes, my lord.", "in the meantime i'll get down to my real business. hand me that map over there. i hereby announce that i've divided my kingdom into three parts, which i'm handing over to the younger generation so i can enjoy a little rest and peace of mind in my old age. cornwall and albany, my loving sons-in-law, i now want to announce publicly what each of my daughters will inherit, to avoid hostilities after i die. the two"], ["great princes of france and burgundy, vying for the hand of my youngest cordelia, have been at my court a long time and will soon have their answers. my daughters, since i'm about to give up my throne and the worries that go along with it, tell me which one of you loves me most, so that i can give my largest gift to the one who deserves it most. goneril, my oldest daughter, you speak first.", "sir, i love you more than words can say. i love you more than eyesight, space, and freedom, beyond wealth or anything of value. i love you as much as life itself, and as much as status, health, beauty, or honor. i love you as much as any child has ever loved her father, with a love too deep to be spoken of. i love you more than any answer to the question \"how much?\"", "what will i say? i can only love and be silent.", "i give you all this land, from this line to that one dense forests, fertile fields, rivers rich with fish, wide meadows. this land will belong to your and albany's children forever. and now what does my second daughter regan, the wife of cornwall, have to say? tell me.", "sir, i'm made of the same stuff as my sister and consider myself just as good as she is. she's described my feelings of love for you precisely, but her description falls a little short of the truth. i reject completely any"], ["joy except my love for you, and i find that only your majesty's love makes me happy.", "poor me, what am i going to say now? but i'm not poor in love my love is bigger than my words are.", "you and your heirs hereby receive this large third of our lovely kingdom, no smaller in area or value than what i gave goneril. now, you, my youngest daughter, my joy, courted by the rich rulers of france and burgundy, what can you tell me that will make me give you a bigger part of my kingdom than i gave your sisters? speak.", "nothing, my lord.", "nothing?", "nothing.", "come on, \"nothing\" will get you nothing. try again.", "i'm unlucky. i don't have a talent for putting my heart's feelings into words. i love you as a child should love her father, neither more nor less.", "what are you saying, cordelia? revise your statement, or you may damage your inheritance.", "my lord, you brought me up and loved me, and i'm giving back just as i should: i obey you, love you, and"], ["honor you. how can my sisters speak the truth when they say they love only you? don't they love their husbands too? hopefully when i get married, i'll give my husband half my love and half my sense of duty. i'm sure i'll never get married in the way my sisters say they're married, loving their father only.", "but do you mean what you're saying?", "yes, my lord.", "so young and so cruel?", "so young, my lord, and honest.", "then that's the way it'll be. the truth will be all the inheritance you get. i swear by the sacred sun, by the mysterious moon, and by all the planets that rule our lives, that i disown you now as my daughter. as of now, there are no family ties between us, and i consider you a stranger to me. foreign savages who eat their own children for dinner will be as close to my heart as you, ex-daughter of mine.", "but sir", "be quiet, kent. don't get in my way when i'm angry. i loved cordelia most of all and planned to spend my old age with her taking care of me. cordelia go"], ["away! get out of my sight! i guess if she doesn't love her father, then i'll only have peace when i'm dead. call the king of france. why is nobody doing anything? call the duke of burgundy.", "cornwall and albany, you and your wives can divide this last third of my kingdom between you. if she wants to be proud, or \"honest,\" as she calls it, she can just marry her own pride. i hereby grant to you two my crown and all the privileges that kingship brings. i'll live one month with one of you, the next month with the other one. all i ask is that you provide me with a hundred knights for my own entourage. i'll keep only the title of king, but you'll have everything else: all the authority and income that come with kingship. to confirm all this, take this crown to share between yourselves. cornwall albany", "king lear, i've always honored you as king, loved you as my father, obeyed you as my master, and thanked you in my prayers", "i'm furious and ready to snap. stay away or else i'll take my anger out on you.", "let your anger fall on me then, even if its sharpness pierces my heart. kent can speak rudely when lear goes mad. what are you doing, old man? when powerful kings cave in to flatterers, do you think loyal men will be afraid to speak out against it? when a majestic king starts acting silly, then it's my duty to be blunt."], ["hold on to your crown and use your better judgment to rethink this rash decision. on my life i swear to you that your youngest daughter doesn't love you least. a loud mouth often points to an empty heart, and just because she's quiet doesn't mean she's unloving.", "kent, if you want to stay alive, stop talking.", "i never considered my life as anything more than a chess pawn for you to play off against your enemies. i'm not afraid to lose it if it helps protect you.", "get out of my sight!", "learn to see better, lear, and let me stay here where you can look to me for good advice.", "now, i swear by apollo", "by apollo, king, you're taking the names of the gods in vain.", "oh, you lowlife! scum!", "please stop, sir.", "sure, kill the doctor who's trying to cure you and pay your disease. take back your gift to albany and cornwall. if you don't, then as long as i'm able to speak i'll keep telling you you've done a bad, bad thing.", "listen to me, you traitor. you'll pay the price for trying to make me go back on the vow i made when i bequeathed my kingdom to them. i've never broken a vow yet. you tried to make me revise my judgment on my youngest daughter, disrespecting my power as"], ["king which i can't put up with either as a ruler or as a person. this is your punishment: i'll give you five days to gather together what you need to survive, then on the sixth day you'll leave this kingdom that hates you. if the day after that you're found in my kingdom, you die. now get out of here! i swear by jupiter i'll never revoke this punishment.", "farewell, king. if this is how you act, it's clear that freedom has been banished from this kingdom. cordelia i hope the gods will protect you, my dear girl, for thinking fairly and speaking correctly. regan goneril and you two, i hope your actions carry out your grand promises of love, so that big words can bring big results. farewell to all of you. i'll carry on my old life in a new land.", "here are the rulers of france and burgundy, my lord.", "my lord the ruler of burgundy, i'll speak to you first. you've been competing with this king for my daughter. what's the least that you will settle for as a"], ["your highness, i want nothing more than what you've already offered. i know you'll offer nothing less than that.", "burgundy, i valued her highly when i cared about her. but now her price has fallen. there she is, over there. if there's anything you like about that worthless little thing, then go for it. she's all yours. but what you see is what you get her only dowry is my disapproval. there she is.", "i don't know what to say.", "she's got big flaws. she has no friends or protectors. i no longer love her. her only dowry is my curse and banishment. so do you take her or leave her?", "i'm sorry, sir, but nobody can make a choice like this in such circumstances.", "then leave her, sir. i swear to god she's not worth anything more than what i told you. france and as for you, great king of france, i'd never insult our friendship by encouraging you to marry a girl i hate. so i beg you to look around for a better match than this wretched creature that you can barely call human.", "this is very odd. until very recently she was your favorite, the object of all your praise and the delight of your old age. it's strange that someone so dear to you could do anything so horrible as to warrant this sudden"], ["hatred. her crime must be extreme and monstrous, or else your earlier love for her wasn't as true as it seemed. but it'd take a miracle to make me believe she could do anything that horrible.", "lear please, your majesty, i don't have a glib way with words and i only say what i mean. if i decide to do something, then i do it instead of talking about it. so i beg your majesty to let people know that it wasn't because i did something atrocious that i fell from your favor. i didn't murder or commit any immoral or lustful act. i'm out of favor simply because i'm not a fortune-hunter and i don't have a smooth way with words and i'm a better person because of it, even though it has cost me your love.", "enough. it would've been better for you not to have been born at all than to displease me as you did.", "you mean this is the whole problem, that she is shy and hasn't said everything she means to say and do? my lord of burgundy, what do you have to say to this lady? love's not love when it gets mixed up with irrelevant outside matters. will you marry her? she herself is as valuable as any dowry could ever be.", "lear king, just give me the dowry you promised me, and i'll make cordelia the duchess of burgundy right away."], ["no, i'll give nothing. i won't budge on that.", "cordelia in that case, i'm sorry you have to lose me as a husband because you lost the king as a father.", "peace to you, my lord of burgundy. since you love money and power so much, i won't be your wife.", "beautiful cordelia, you're all the richer now that you're poor. you're more valuable now that you're rejected and more loved now that you're hated. i'll take you and your wonderful virtues here and now, if it's okay that i'm picking up what others have thrown away. it's so strange that in neglecting you so cruelly, the gods have made me love you so dearly. king, the daughter you've rejected is now mine, as queen of france. no duke of spineless burgundy can take this treasure of a girl from me now. say goodbye to them, cordelia, even though they've been unkind to you. you'll find a much better place in france than what you're giving up here.", "she's yours, king of france. take her. she's no longer my daughter, and i'll never see her face again. cordelia so get out of here. leave without any blessing or love from me. come with me, burgundy.", "say goodbye to your sisters."], ["sisters, you whom our father loves so dearly, i leave you now with tears in my eyes. i know you for what you really are, but as your sister i'm reluctant to criticize you. take good care of our father and show him the love that you have professed. i leave him in your care but oh, if only i were still in his favor i could arrange for better care for him. goodbye to you both.", "don't tell us what our duty is.", "you should focus instead on pleasing your husband, who's taken you in as an act of charity. you've failed to obey your father and you deserve to be deprived of everything that's been taken away from you.", "time will tell what you've got up your sleeve. you can be deceitful in the short term, but eventually truth will come out. have a good life.", "come with me, my dear cordelia.", "sister, i have a lot to say about things that concern us both. i think that our father will leave here tonight.", "yes, i'm sure he will to stay with you. next month he'll stay with us.", "he's so flighty in his old age, as we keep noticing. he has always loved cordelia best, and his bad judgment in disowning her now is obvious."], ["he's going senile. but then again he's never really understood his own feelings very well.", "yes, he was hotheaded even in the prime of his life. now that he's old, we can expect to have to deal not only with his old character flaws, which have turned into deep-rooted habits, but also with the uncontrollable crabbiness that comes with old age.", "we'll probably witness many more outbursts from him, like banishing kent.", "there's still the king of france's farewell ceremony. let's put our heads together. if our father continues to use his authority as usual, then his recent abdication of the kingdom will just hurt us.", "we'll have to think about it carefully.", "we have to strike while the iron's hot."], ["i only worship what's natural, not what's manmade. why should i let myself be tortured by manmade social customs that deprive me of my rights simply because i was born twelve or fourteen months later than my older brother? why do they call me \"bastard\" and \"lowlife\" when i'm just as gifted in mind and body as legitimate children? why do they call us bastards \"lowlifes\"? always \"lowlife,\" \"bastard,\" \"lowlife,\" \"lowlife.\" at least we bastards were conceived in a moment of passionate lust rather than in a dull, tired marriage bed, where half-sleeping parents monotonously churn out a bunch of sissy kids. all right then, legitimate brother edgar, i have to have your lands. our father loves me just as much as the legitimate edgar. what a nice word that is, \"legitimate\"! well, my legitimate edgar, if this letter works and my plan succeeds, edmund the lowlife will beat the legitimate. look out, i'm on my way up. three cheers for bastards!", "kent's been banished just like that? and the king of france gone in a huff? and king lear's abdicated his authority, making his kingship a ceremonial title only? all this so suddenly? edmund, what's going on? what's the news?"], ["no news, my lord.", "why are you hiding that letter?", "i don't have any news to report, my lord.", "what's that paper you were reading?", "it's nothing, my lord.", "no? then why did you have to stick it in your pocket in such a hurry? if it were nothing, you wouldn't need to hide it. let's see it. come on, if it's nothing, i won't need glasses to read it.", "please, sir, i beg you. it's a letter from my brother that i haven't finished reading yet. but judging from the bit i have read, it's not fit for you to see.", "give me that letter, sir.", "now i'll offend you whether i give it to you or not. the problem is in what the letter says, as far as i can tell.", "let's see, let's see.", "i hope for my brother's sake that he just wrote it to test my honor.", "\"the custom of respecting the elderly makes it hard for the young and healthy to live well, and keeps us without our inheritance until we are so old we can't enjoy our happiness anyway. the power of the elderly is starting to feel like a silly and foolish slavery to me, and they only enjoy that power because we let them have it."], ["come talk to me about this. if our father were dead you'd receive half of his revenue forever, and you'd have my undying love, edgar.\" hmm, what's this, a conspiracy? \"if our father were dead, you'd receive half of his revenue forever\" my son edgar? how did he bring himself to write such a thing? how could he have even entertained these thoughts in his heart? how did you get this letter? who delivered it?", "nobody delivered it, my lord. that's what's clever about it. it was tossed into the window of my room.", "you're sure the handwriting is your brother's?", "if he'd written nice things, i'd swear yes right away. but as it stands, i wish i could believe it wasn't.", "but it is his handwriting?", "it's his handwriting, my lord, but i hope he didn't mean what he wrote.", "has he ever tested out these ideas on you before?", "never, my lord. but i've often heard him argue that when sons are at their prime and their fathers are declining, the sons should be their fathers' guardians and manage their fathers' money.", "oh, what a villain! that's just what he said in the letter. evil villain! monstrous, hateful, bestial villain! worse"], ["than a beast! go look for him. i'll arrest him. horrid villain! where is he?", "i'm not sure, my lord. but it may be a good idea to restrain your rage until you find out exactly what he meant. if you go after him and then find out that you made a mistake, it would damage your reputation and greatly undermine his loyalty to you. i'll bet my life that he only wrote this letter to gauge my love for you, and for no other reason.", "do you think so?", "if you agree, i'll hide you somewhere where you can eavesdrop on us talking about it, and hear how he feels with your own ears. you won't have to wait longer than until tonight.", "he can't possibly be such a monster", "and i'm sure he isn't.", "toward his own father who loves him so completely. oh, god! edmund, go find him. gain his confidence for me, please. manage him however you think best. i'd give up my rank and fortune to be free from my doubts.", "i'll find him right away, sir, and carry out the business as well as i can. then i'll let you know what's happening.", "these recent eclipses of the sun and moon don't bode well for us. though science can explain them away, disasters still come after eclipses. love cools off, friendships break up, and brothers become enemies. riots"], ["break out, civil war erupts, kings are betrayed, and the bond between father and son snaps. this wicked son of mine confirms the prediction son against father. the king acts unnaturally father against child. we've seen the best our age has to offer. conspiracies, fakery, betrayal, and disorder are all that's left until we die. find out what this villainous edgar is thinking, edmund. you won't lose any respect. just do it carefully. and to think that the noble and loyal kent has been banished, for the crime of telling the truth! it's strange, strange.", "this is a classic example of the idiocy of the world: when we're down and out often because of our own excesses we put all the blame on the sun, the moon, and the stars, as if they forced us to be bad, or the heavens compelled us to be villainous or stupid. as if we become thieves and traitors according to astrological signs or obey planetary influences to become drunks, liars, and adulterers! as if some universal power pushed us into evil deeds! what a sneaky trick it is for lustful mankind to blame our horniness on some star! my father and mother coupled when the demonic moon was descending, and i was born under the big dipper, so it's inevitable that i'm rude and oversexed. christ! i would have been what i am even if the most virginal star in the heavens had twinkled at my conception. edgar", "and, speak of the devil, here he comes, right on cue. i've got to play the role and sigh like a poor beggar. oh, these eclipses predict such disorder. fa, sol, la, mi."], ["hello, brother edmund. what are you thinking about so seriously?", "i was thinking about what an astrologer predicted the other day. he wrote about what these eclipses mean.", "are you spending your valuable time on that?", "oh, i assure you the things he writes about are wretched things like divisions between parents and children, death, famine, broken friendships, political rebellion, treason against the king and noblemen, exiled friends, dissolved armies, adultery, and i don't know what else.", "how long have you believed in astrology?", "come on. when was the last time you saw my father?", "why, last night.", "did you speak to him?", "yes, we talked for a couple of hours.", "did you leave on good terms? did he express any dissatisfaction with you, either in his words or his face?", "no, none at all.", "try to remember how you might have offended him, and try to avoid spending time with him until his anger has cooled a little. right now he's so angry that even if he harmed you physically, he'd still be raging."], ["some villain has told lies about me.", "that's what i'm afraid of. i suggest you lay low until his rage cools a little. in the meantime, come home with me, and when the time is right i'll take you to talk to him. please go. here's my key. if you go outside, arm yourself.", "arm myself?", "brother, i'm giving you good advice. arm yourself. i'd be a liar if i told you nobody wanted to hurt you. i've told you what i've seen and heard, but i've toned it down a lot. i've spared you you the full extent of the horror that threatens you. now please go.", "will i hear from you soon?", "i'll help you through this business.", "a gullible father and a brother who's so innocent that he can't suspect anyone else of wanting to hurt him these are the two fools i need for my plan to work. i know exactly how to proceed. if i can't have an estate by birthright, then i'll get it by being clever. any trick that works is good for me."], ["did my father hit one of my attendants for scolding his fool?", "yes, ma'am.", "he constantly offends me. every hour he comes out with some horrible new offense that puts us all on edge. i won't stand for it. his knights are getting out of control, and he himself reprimands us about every little detail. when he comes back from hunting, i'm not going to speak to him. tell him i'm sick. and if you're not as attentive in serving him as you used to be, that'll be good. i'll take responsibility for it.", "he's coming, ma'am. i hear him.", "be as lazy and neglectful as you like around him you and the other servants. i want it to become an issue. if he doesn't like it, he can go live with my sister. i know she feels the same way about him that i do, and she'll stand her ground. that useless old man still thinks he can wield all the powers he's given away. i swear, old fools become like babies again. you can't just flatter them; you also have to discipline them when you see that they're misguided. remember what i've told you.", "very well, ma'am."], ["and make sure the servants are less friendly to his knights. don't worry about the consequences. tell your men as much. i want this to provoke confrontations, so i can give him a piece of my mind. i'll write to my sister and tell her my plans. now go, set up for dinner."], ["if i can disguise my voice as well as my appearance, then i'll be able to carry out my plan perfectly. i was banished, but hopefully i can serve the very king who condemned me. i love my master, and he'll find me very hard-working.", "don't make me wait for dinner even a moment. get it ready immediately.", "kent well now, who are you?", "a man, sir.", "what's your profession? what do you want from me?", "profess that i'm as good as i seem i'll faithfully serve a master who trusts me, love those who are honest, talk with those who are wise and don't talk too much. i'm god-fearing, i fight if i must, and i don't eat fish.", "but who are you?", "an honest guy who's as poor as the king.", "if you're as poor a subject as he is a king, you definitely are poor. what do you want?"], ["to work as a servant.", "who do you want to work for?", "you.", "do you know me?", "no, sir, but there's something about your face that makes me want to serve you.", "what do you see in my face?", "authority.", "what work can you do?", "i can be discreet in honorable matters, ride a horse, run, tell a good story badly, and deliver a plain message bluntly. i'm good at everything that ordinary men can do. the best thing about me is that i'm hardworking.", "how old are you?", "not young enough to fall in love with a woman because she sings well, but not old enough to dote on a woman for any reason. i'm forty-eight.", "follow me. you'll work for me. if i still like you after dinner, i won't send you away yet. hey, dinnertime! dinner! where's my fool? go call my fool and have him come here."], ["you, sir, where's my daughter?", "i beg your pardon, sir", "what did that guy say? call the numbskull back in here.", "where's my fool? you'd think everyone was asleep.", "so what's going on? where's that dog?", "he says your daughter's not feeling well, my lord.", "why didn't the jerk come back to me when i called him?", "sir, he told me quite bluntly that he didn't feel like it.", "didn't feel like it?", "my lord, i don't know what's going on, but it seems to me that your highness isn't being treated as politely as before. the servants, the duke, and your daughter all seem to be treating you less kindly.", "huh! do you really mean that?", "please forgive me if i'm mistaken, my lord but i can't keep quiet when i think you're being insulted."], ["no, you're just reminding me of something i've also noticed. i've felt neglected recently, but i decided that it was more likely that i was being hypersensitive than that they were intentionally unkind. i'll look into it further. but where's my fool? i haven't seen him for two days.", "ever since cordelia left for france, sir, the fool has been depressed.", "let's not talk about it. i've noticed it myself. go and tell my daughter i want to speak with her.", "and you, go call my fool.", "you there, sir, come here please. who am i, sir?", "the father of the lady of the house, sir.", "\"the father of the lady of the house\"? you scoundrel! you lowlife son-of-a-bitch! you dog, you peasant!", "i'm sorry, sir, but i'm not any of those things.", "are you making faces at me, you scoundrel? oswald", "i won't be hit, my lord.", "oswald or tripped, you lowlife player?"], ["kent thank you, sir. you serve me well, and i'll love you for it.", "oswald come on, sir, get up and get out of here! i'll teach you to respect your betters. if you want me to trip you again, then stick around. if not, get going. go on. do you know what's good for you? there you go.", "now, my friendly servant, thank you.", "kent here's a token of my gratitude.", "wait, let me hire him too. here's my fool's cap, a token of my gratitude. kent", "well hello, my good boy. how are you doing?", "kent guy, you'd better take my cap.", "why, fool?", "why? for standing up for this unpopular king. no, if you can't adjust to political changes, you'll suffer for it. there, take my fool's cap. this guy here has banished two of his daughters and blessed the third one without intending to. if you work for him, you're a fool and should wear a fool's cap. so how's it going, uncle? i wish i had two fool's caps and two daughters."], ["why, my boy?", "if i gave them all i own, i'd have two fool's caps for myself. here's mine. ask your daughters for another one.", "watch out, boy remember i can whip you.", "i get whipped like a dog for telling the truth, while lady bitch gets to stand around the fire and stink the place up with her false words.", "a constant pain to me!", "i'll recite something for you, guy.", "yes, do that.", "listen up, uncle. have more than you show, speak less than you know, lend less than you owe. ride more than you walk, don't believe everything you hear, don't bet everything on one throw of the dice, leave behind your booze and your whore, and stay indoors, and you'll end up with more than two tens to a twenty.", "that makes no sense, fool. it's nothing.", "in that case it's like the words of an unpaid lawyer. you paid me nothing for it. can't you make any use of nothing, uncle?"], ["why, no, boy. nothing can be made out of nothing.", "kent please tell him that his income is nothing, now that he's given his lands away. he won't believe a fool.", "you're a bitter fool.", "do you know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and a sweet one?", "no, son. tell me.", "bring here the gentleman who advised you to give away your land. you can stand in his place. the sweet and bitter fool will appear right away. the sweet fool in a fool's costume that's me. the bitter one is the other one that's you.lear", "are you calling me a fool, boy?", "well, you've given away all your other rightful titles. the title of \"fool\" is the only one left.", "this isn't entirely a joke, your highness.", "no. i wish i could be a complete joker but so many lords and important men are also playing fools that i can't have a monopoly on it. ladies too they're always snatching away my role as the biggest fool. uncle, give me an egg, and i'll give you two crowns."], ["which two crowns would those be?", "well, when i cut the egg in half and eat the whites, the yolk will be in two parts like two golden crowns. when you cut your own crown and kingdom in half and gave away both parts, you were as foolish as the old man in the old story who carries his donkey on his back instead of letting the donkey carry him. you didn't have much brains inside the bald crown of your head when you gave away the gold crown of your kingdom. if i'm telling the truth like a fool in saying all this, whip the first person who thinks i sound foolish.", "when did you become so fond of singing, boy?", "i've been singing ever since you made your daughters into your mothers by giving them all your power. that's when you gave them the spanking paddle and pulled your pants down, please, uncle, hire a teacher who can teach your fool to lie. i want to learn how to lie.", "if you lie, boy, we'll have you whipped."], ["i'm amazed how similar you and your daughters are. they want to whip me for telling the truth, you want to whip me for lying, and sometimes i'm even whipped for keeping quiet. i'd rather be anything besides a fool. and yet i wouldn't want to be you, uncle. when you gave away pieces of your kingdom, it's as if you cut off pieces on both sides of your brain and left nothing in the middle. here comes the owner of one piece.", "what's going on, daughter? why are you frowning like that? i think you've been frowning too much recently.", "lear you were better off when you didn't have to care whether she frowned or not. now you're a big zero, with no digit in front of it to give it value. i'm better than you are i'm a fool and you're nothing. goneril yes, i promise i'll shut up. that's what you're telling me with that expression on your face, even though you don't say anything. mum, mum, the man who gives away his crust and his crumbs will discover that he needs some crumbs back. lear that guy is an empty pea pod.", "lear it's not just your fool here who can say whatever he wants, but your whole obnoxious entourage keeps whining and arguing, bursting out in intolerably vicious riots. sir, i thought you could put an end to all this if i told you about it. but judging by what you've said and done recently, i'm worried that you don't mind this chaos, and even approve of it. if that's true, it's shameful. i realize that restraining your knights"], ["will damage your reputation with them and under ordinary circumstances it would be unfortunate to have them see you as an ogre. however, this is an extreme situation, and it's more important to control it than to worry about how you'll look.", "you know, uncle, a sparrow once raised a cuckoo in its nest until the cuckoo grew up and bit the sparrow's head off. so the candle went out and now we're all in the dark.", "are you my daughter?", "come on, sir. i know you're very wise, and i wish you would use some of that wisdom to snap out of this mood you've been in lately and be your true self again.", "even an idiot knows when the normal order has been inverted and the cart is pulling the horse. whoo-hoo, honey, i love you!", "does anyone here know who i am? i'm not lear. does lear walk and talk like this? where are his eyes? either his mind is losing its grip or his judgment is screwy. hey, am i awake? i don't think so. who can tell me who i am?", "you're lear's shadow.", "i'd like to find out who i am, since the obvious signs around me wrongly indicate that i've got daughters.", "daughters who can make you obey them.", "goneril what's your name, my dear lady?"], ["this fake astonishment of yours is just like your other pranks. i'm asking you to understand my point of view. since you're old and respected, you should be wise. but you're keeping a hundred knights here who are so disorderly, vulgar, and obnoxious that our noble court is starting to look like a noisy cheap hotel. they're such oversexed gluttons that i feel like we're living in a pub or a whorehouse rather than a respectable palace. it's shameful, and we have to make some changes right away. please, as a favor to me and if you don't do it for me, i'll do it myself reduce the number of your knights a little. keep the ones who are older, like you, and who act their age.", "hell and damnation! saddle up my horses. call my knights together. i won't bother you any more, you monstrous bastard. you're not really my daughter, but i still have one daughter left.", "you hit my servants, and your disorderly mob of knights treat their superiors like servants.", "you'll be sorry later, but it'll be too late. albany oh, sir, are you here now? you decided to come? answer me, sir. get my horses ready."], ["ingratitude is always hideous, but an ungrateful child is uglier than a sea monster!", "please, sir, be patient.", "goneril you disgusting vulture, you're a liar! my knights are the finest men who can attend a king, and they meticulously uphold their reputation. oh, how ugly did cordelia's small flaw appear! and now cordelia's small flaw has bent me completely out of shape and sucked all the love out of my heart. oh, lear, lear, lear! let me beat this portal that let my good sense out and my foolishness in! go, go, people.", "my lord, i have no idea what's upset you, but whatever it is, i had nothing to do with it.", "that may be true, my lord. ah, dear nature, my goddess, listen to me! change your plans if you ever intended for this woman to have children. make her sterile and dry up her womb so that no baby will ever come out of her body and honor her. if she must give birth, make her child a bad seed who will torment her, give her a forehead wrinkled with worry, make her cry until her cheeks are sunken."], ["let it be a wicked child who mocks the mother who cares for it. make my daughter feel make her feel how an ungrateful child hurts worse than a snakebite. now let's leave. go!", "dear gods in heaven, what's the reason for this?", "don't even bother to ask the reasons. just let him rant and rave. he's senile.", "what, fifty of my knights dismissed all at once? in only two weeks?", "what are you talking about, sir?", "i'll tell you. goneril i'm ashamed that you have the power to upset me like this, as though you're worth the tears you're making me shed. damn you! may you feel every pain a father's curse can bring! if i cry again because of you, i'll rip my eyes out of their sockets and throw them and their wet tears down to moisten the earth. has it come to this? then so be it. i have one more daughter who i'm sure is kind. when"], ["she hears what you've done to me, she'll tear up your wolflike face with her fingernails. and then you'll see that despite what you thought, i'll be as powerful as i was before. you'll see, i promise you.", "did you hear that?", "goneril, you know how much i love you, but still i have to say", "shush, please. come, sir, no more. oswald, come here! fool and you, sir, you're more of a rascal than a fool. go follow your master.", "uncle lear, uncle lear, wait. take your fool with you. a fox you've trapped and such a daughter should both be slaughtered, if my fool's cap is worth a rope to bind them. so the fool follows you.", "my father can't think straight a hundred knights! just imagine the risk we run in letting him keep a hundred knights around! he could use them to strong-arm us into bowing to every little whim of his, and keep us at his mercy. oswald, where are you?"], ["you may be exaggerating the risks.", "that's better than exaggerating our trust. it's always better to get rid of what you're scared of than to be afraid. i know how his mind works. i've written to my sister telling her everything he's said. if she welcomes him and his hundred knights after i've shown how inappropriately he's behaved", "here, ma'am.", "well, oswald? have you written that letter to my sister yet?", "yes, ma'am.", "take some men and horses and go to her. tell her everything that worries me. add details of your own to back up what i'm saying. now go, and hurry back.", "no, no, my husband, i'm not angry that you urge me to deal more gently with my father. but you're showing a lack of wisdom that that is much more noticeable than your tenderness toward him.", "maybe you know more than i do. but people often screw things up trying to make them better."], ["no, not at all", "all right, all right. time will tell."], ["kent go ahead of us and deliver these letters to the earl of gloucester. answer my daughter's questions about the letter, but don't tell her anything else you know. if you're not quick enough, i'll get there before you.", "i won't sleep until i've delivered your letter, my lord.", "if a man's brain were in his feet, wouldn't it be susceptible to frostbite?", "yes, boy.", "in that case, cheer up. your brains won't need slippers to protect them from frostbite, since your brains aren't in your feet if they were you wouldn't take this useless journey to see regan.", "ha, ha, ha!", "your other daughter regan will treat you kindly, you'll see. even though she's as similar to goneril as one crabapple is like another, still i know what i know.", "and what do you know, boy?", "i know that regan will taste just like goneril both of them sour crabapples. do you know why the nose is in the middle of a person's face?"], ["no.", "why, to keep the eyes on the sides, so that you can see anything that you can't sniff out.", "i was wrong to her", "do you know how an oyster makes its shell?", "no.", "me neither. but i know why a snail carries its house on its back.", "why?", "so that he always has a roof over his head. he can't give his house away to his daughters, leaving himself without shelter.", "i want to forget what i am. such a kind father! are my horses ready?", "your attendant asses are getting the horses ready. there's a nice reason why the constellation pleiades has only seven stars in it.", "because it doesn't have eight?", "that's right. you'd make a good fool.", "i could take back my crown by force what outrageous ingratitude!"], ["if you were my fool, uncle, i'd have you beaten for getting old before your time.", "how's that?", "you're not supposed to get old until you're wise.", "oh, dear god, don't let me go mad! keep me balanced and sane. i don't want to go mad.", "so, are the horses ready?", "they're ready, my lord.", "come on, boy.", "any girl who laughs because i'm going with the king is too foolish to remain a virgin very long."], ["hello, curan.", "hello, sir. i just saw your father the lord gloucester and notified him that the duke of cornwall and his wife regan will stay with him here tonight.", "why is that?", "i don't know. have you heard the latest news? i mean the whispered rumors, since that's all they are at this point.", "no, i haven't. what's going on?", "you haven't heard of the war brewing between the dukes of cornwall and albany?", "not a word.", "you may hear about it soon. goodbye, sir.", "the duke will be here tonight? all the better in fact it's the best that could happen. his arrival fits perfectly into my plan. my father's ready to arrest my brother, and i have one risky thing to do. fast work and a little luck are all i need. brother, could i have a word with you? come down, brother."], ["father is on the lookout. get out of here quickly! it has leaked out that you're hiding here. if you leave now, you can take advantage of the darkness and sneak away. you haven't said anything against the duke of cornwall, have you? he's rushing on his way here right now, and regan's with him. have you said anything against cornwall or albany? think about it.", "i'm sure of it. i haven't said a word.", "i hear my father coming. forgive me. i have to pretend to threaten you with my sword. draw your sword too, as if you're defending yourself. be convincing. give up! go see my father. bring in some light! edgar run, brother. torches, bring in the torches! edgar goodbye, then.", "if i had some blood on me it would look like i'd fought more fiercely. i've seen drunk men do worse than this just fooling around. father, father! stop, stop! won't anyone help me?", "edmund, where's your wicked brother?"], ["he was standing here in the dark with his sword pointing at me. he was mumbling some black magic spells, appealing to the moon to help him in his evil plans", "but where is he?", "look, sir, i'm bleeding.", "where is the villain, edmund?", "he ran out that way, sir, when he couldn't", "follow him, now! go.", "when he couldn't what?", "when he couldn't persuade me to kill you. i told him that the gods hate men who kill their fathers and unleash all their thunder on them, and that the bond between father and child was sacred. in short, when i told him how firmly opposed i was to his hideous plan, he pulled out his sword and lunged at my defenseless body, cutting my arm. bolstered by righteousness, i prepared to fight, and when he saw my excitement or perhaps because my shouting scared him he ran away suddenly.", "let him run far away. if he stays in this country he'll be found. and if he's caught, he'll be executed. the duke of cornwall, my master and patron, is arriving tonight. on his authority i'll proclaim that whoever finds edgar and helps bring the murderous coward to"], ["justice will be rewarded. whoever helps edgar hide will die.", "after i urged him not to kill you, i saw that he was still determined to do it. enraged, i threatened to expose him. he answered, \"you penniless bastard! do you really think that if it came down to my word against yours, anyone would believe you? no. i'd deny whatever evidence you had against me even if it were in my own handwriting and turn it all into evidence against you and your plans for treachery. and you must think people are stupid if you believe they wouldn't realize all the motives you have for trying to kill me.\"", "oh, how monstrously evil! he said he would deny that he wrote his letter? he cannot truly be my son. listen. the duke's trumpets. i don't know why he's come here. i'll forbid all ships from leaving our harbors. the villain won't escape. the duke will agree with me on that. and i'll send his picture everywhere so that the whole kingdom will know what he looks like. and as for you, my loyal and true son, i'll find some way to make you my heir.", "how are you, my friend? ever since i arrived here, just now, i've been hearing strange rumors."], ["if they're true, no punishment is harsh enough for the criminal. how are you, my lord?", "oh, madam, my old heart is broken, broken.", "did my father's godson try to kill you? the one whom my father named, your son edgar?", "oh, my lady, i'm ashamed to admit it.", "wasn't he friends with all those brawling knights who serve my father?", "i don't know, madam. oh, it's too terrible.", "to answer your question, ma'am yes, he was friendly with those knights.", "then it's no surprise they had a bad influence on him. they probably put him up to killing old man gloucester to get his money. tonight i received a letter from my sister telling me all about them and warning me not be at home in case they come to stay at my house.", "and i won't be there either. edmund, i'm told you've acted like a true son to your father.", "i just did my duty, sir.", "he exposed edgar's murderous plot, and was wounded, as you see there, when trying to apprehend him.", "are your men searching for him?"], ["yes, my lord.", "if he's caught, he'll never make trouble for anyone again. feel free to use my authority however you wish in order to apprehend him. as for you, edmund, you've been so loyal and virtuous throughout this whole business. i'd like you to work for me. i need people as trustworthy as you.", "i'll always be loyal to you, sir.", "cornwall thank you, my lord, for your kindness to edmund.", "you don't know why we came to visit you", "yes, and so unexpectedly, at night. there are some important matters we need your advice on, gloucester. my father and my sister have both recently written to me about arguments between them. i realized it would be inconvenient to answer them from home, especially since the king may be on his way there. their messengers are ready, waiting to deliver our response in these matters. so please, old friend, give us some good advice. we need it desperately and immediately.", "i'm at your service, madam. both of you are very welcome here."], ["good morning to you, friend. do you work in this house?", "yes, i do.", "where should we stable our horses?", "in the mud.", "please, sir, be kind to me and tell me.", "i won't be kind to you.", "in that case, i don't much care for you either.", "if i could get my hands on you, i'd make you care.", "why are you talking to me like this? i don't even know you.", "ah, but i know you.", "who am i then?", "you're a lowlife, a rascal who eats leftover scraps. you're an ignoble, arrogant, shallow, vulgar, pretentious, conceited, filthy third-rate servant who thinks he's something special. you're a cowardly lawyer-loving bastard; a vain, brown-nosing, prissy scoundrel who'd pimp himself out to advance his career; a bag lady. you're nothing but a lowlife, a beggar, a coward, and a pimp, the son and heir of a mutt bitch. i'll beat you until you whine and cry if you deny the least bit of this."], ["what an ogre you are to slander someone you don't know, and who doesn't know you!", "what a shameless jerk you are to pretend you don't know me! it was just two days ago that i tripped you and beat you up in front of the king. draw your sword, scoundrel. it may be nighttime, but there's enough moonlight to fight by. i'll make ground beef out of you. draw, you affected, preening son of a bitch! draw your sword!", "get away from me! i've got nothing to do with you.", "draw your sword, you jerk! you come here with letters against the king, and you take his conceited daughter's side against his royal highness. draw your sword, scoundrel, or i'll slice your thighs like flank steak. draw your sword! come on!", "help! murderer! help!", "fight, peasant. don't run away, scoundrel. stand and fight, you overdressed servant, fight! oswald", "help! murder, murder!", "what's going on here? get away from each other.", "edmund well, kid, let's see you fight. come on, i'll show you how."], ["you have weapons? what's going on here?", "stop it, i order you. the next person to strike again dies. what's going on here?", "these are the messengers from my sister and the king.", "what are you fighting about? tell me.", "i'm out of breath, sir.", "no wonder, with all your exertions, you cowardly rascal. you're not worth being called a man. the only thing manly about you are your clothes. a tailor made you.", "that's an odd thing to say. how can a tailor make a person?", "definitely a tailor, sir. a sculptor or a painter couldn't have screwed him up as bad as that, even as an apprentice.", "but tell me what you're fighting about.", "this old ruffian here, whom i didn't kill because he's so old", "you useless bastard you're like the letter \"z,\" a totally unnecessary addition to the alphabet. my lord, please let me grind this lumpy lowlife into a powder and use it to plaster up the bathroom walls. you didn't kill me because i'm so old, you fawning dog?", "calm down. don't you have any manners, you savage?", "yes, sir, but not when i'm enraged."], ["why are you enraged?", "i'm angry that a dishonorable lowlife like this wears a sword like a gentleman. smiling swindlers such as he undo the sacred bonds that unite people together, and only encourage the unreasonable passions of their masters. they foster both rage and apathy. they say \"yes\" and \"no,\" turning their noses whichever way the wind blows without taking a firm stance on anything. they blindly follow their masters' impulses, like dogs. damn your ugly stinking face! are you laughing at what i say, as if i were a fool? if i had my way with you right now, i'd send you to back to where you came from.", "are you insane, old man?", "kent what did you start quarreling over? just tell us.", "i couldn't hate that jerk over there any more than i do.", "why are you calling him a jerk? what did he do to you?", "i don't like his face.", "but maybe you don't like mine, or his, or hers either.", "i'm used to telling the truth, sir, and i have to say that i've seen better faces than those i see here."], ["this is a guy who's been praised for his honest bluntness, and who now insolently pretends to be plainspoken and twists the natural meanings of words. no flattery for him, no sir! he's honest, he's got to speak the truth. if people take what he says, fine. if not, he's got truth on his side! i know his type. he's sneaky behind all his so-called bluntness, sneakier than twenty brown-nosing bootlickers who only tell you what you want to hear.", "dearest, kindest, most honorable sir, may i say, with your esteemed approval, which is lit up by the illuminating radiance of the sun-god phoebus, that", "what do you mean by that?", "i tried to stop speaking plainly, since you dislike plain speech so much. sir, i know i'm not a flatterer. the guy who tricked you with plain language was just a plain crook which i'm not, however much i may displease you by not being one.", "oswald how did you offend him?", "i never offended him at all. recently, the king hit me because of a misunderstanding. this man took sides with the king and tripped me. when i was down on the ground he insulted me, and then started acting tough to seem courageous in front of the king. the king praised him, even though i had never offered any resistance at all. now he pulled out his sword on me again, still riled up from our first encounter."], ["these cowards manage to make fools of brave men.", "bring out the ! we'll teach you, you stubborn old bastard, you arrogant show-off.", "sir, i'm too old to be taught anything. don't put me in the stocks. i serve the king, who sent me here. if you put me in the stocks you'll insult him both as a king and as a man.", "bring out the stocks! i swear on my life and honor, he'll sit here in the stocks until noon.", "only until noon, my lord? no, the whole day, and all night too.", "ma'am, you wouldn't treat me like this if i were your father's dog.", "but since you're his scoundrel servant, i will.", "this guy is exactly the kind of person your sister warned us about. come on, bring in the stocks, now!", "i beg you not to do this, my lord. he's done wrong, and his master the king will punish him for it. but the kind"], ["of punishment you propose is more suited to petty shoplifters than to royal attendants. the king will be offended to find out that his messenger is so badly treated.", "i'll take responsibility for that.", "my sister would be much more offended to have her trusted messenger abused and assaulted just for carrying out her orders. put his legs in the stocks.", "gloucester let's go, my lord.", "i'm sorry, my friend. the duke always gets it his way, and everyone knows you can't budge him once he's made up his mind. i'll try talking to him again.", "please don't, sir. i've been up for a long time and have done a lot of traveling recently. this punishment will be a good chance to catch up on my sleep. the rest of the time i'll whistle to entertain myself. even good men have bad luck. have a good morning.", "it's wrong for the duke to do this. the king will be angry with him."], ["oh, good king lear, you're proving that, just as they say, everything goes from good to bad. rise and shine, sun, so i can read this letter. only those who are truly miserable see miracles. i know this letter is from cordelia, who knows that i'm serving the king in disguise. she says that she will have time, now that she's away from the monstrous conditions here, to find a way to fix things. i'm exhausted. i've been awake too long. this fatigue gives me an excuse to shut my eyes so i can't see myself humiliated in the stocks. good night, lady luck. smile and spin your wheel of fortune again."], ["i heard myself declared an outlaw and escaped capture by hiding in the trunk of a hollow tree. every town and port is crawling with henchmen on the lookout, waiting to capture me. but i'll survive while i can. i've decided to disguise myself as the lowliest and rattiest beggar that mankind has ever seen. i'll smear my face with filth, put on a loincloth, make my hair matted and tangled, and face the bad weather wearing almost nothing. i've seen beggars out of insane asylums who stick pins and nails into their numb arms. they pray or roar lunatic curses, horrifying farmers and villagers into giving them alms. \"poor crazy tom!\" they call themselves. well, at least that's something. as edgar, i'm nothing at all."], ["it's strange that regan and her husband left their house without sending back my messenger.", "according to what i heard, they had no travel plans as of last night.", "lear hail, noble master!", "what's this? are you sitting around in this humiliation to amuse yourself?", "no, my lord.", "ha, ha! that's a nasty garter belt. you tie up horses by their heads, dogs and bears by their necks, monkeys by their waists, and humans by their legs. when a person's prone to wanderlust, he has to wear wooden socks, like a chastity belt around his ankles.", "kent who could have misunderstood your assigment so completely as to lock you up like this?", "your daughter and son-in-law.", "no.", "yes.", "i'm telling you \"no.\"", "and i'm telling you \"yes.\""], ["no, no, they wouldn't.", "yes, they have.", "by the god jupiter above, i swear \"no.\"", "by jupiter's wife juno, i swear \"yes.\"", "they wouldn't dare. they couldn't, they wouldn't. it's worse than murder to humiliate a king's messenger like this. tell me as quickly and clearly as you can what you did to deserve this punishment, or what made them think they could inflict it on you.", "my lord, when i arrived at their home i gave them your letter. before i had a chance to get up from my respectful kneeling position, goneril's messenger arrived, stinky, sweaty, and out of breath. he interrupted me, spouted out greetings from her, and delivered her letter, which they opened immediately. after reading it, they gathered their entourage together and got on their horses to go. they glared at me and ordered me to follow them and wait for their answer. after we arrived here, i ran into that other messenger who made them give me the cold shoulder the very same guy who was so rude to you, king. i admit it was foolish to draw my sword on him, but i had to act like a man. he woke up the whole house with his loud and cowardly screams. that's why your daughter and son-in-law are punishing me shamefully."], ["this story bodes more stormy weather. fathers who wear rags make their children neglect them. but fathers who are rich make their children kind. lady luck is a fickle whore and never gives the poor a break. but despite all this, your daughters will give you a lot of money or do i mean pain? in the coming year.", "i'm getting hysterical. i feel my stomach squeezing up against my heart. calm down, you belong lower down! where is this daughter of mine?", "inside, sir, with the earl.", "don't follow me. stay here.", "you didn't do anything else to earn this punishment?", "nothing. tell me, why did the king arrive with such a small entourage?", "if they'd put you in the stocks for asking that question, you would've deserved it.", "why, fool?", "you need to learn what ants know well about winter there's no point in slaving away if there's no hope for profit. serving the king will get you nowhere. everyone can see that, and even blind men can smell the stench of his misery now. when you see a huge wheel rolling down a hill, you shouldn't try to hold on to it or it'll break your neck."], ["but if you see a wheel going uphill, latch on for the ride. and when a wise man gives you better advice than i just did, give me my advice back again. i only want idiots following my advice, the advice of a fool. the gentleman who serves you only for profit and is only superficially loyal to you will take off when it starts to rain and leave you alone in the storm. but i'll linger. the fool will stay. and let the wise man run away. the servant who runs away is a fool. but this fool is no scoundrel, by god.", "where did you learn that song, fool?", "not in the stocks, fool.", "how can they refuse to speak with me? how can they say that they're sick or exhausted or that they have traveled all night!? they're playing with me. these are tricks. this is rebellion. go ask them again and make them see me this time.", "my dear lord, you know how passionately stubborn the duke is. he never changes his mind.", "hell! damn it all to hell! \"passionately\"? what \"passion\"? gloucester, gloucester, i want to speak with the duke of cornwall and his wife.", "my lord, i informed them as much."], ["\"informed them\"? do you understand what i'm saying, man?", "yes, my lord.", "the king wants to speak with cornwall. the father wants to speak with his daughter. he orders them he begs them. did you inform them of that? this is unbelievable! \"passionate\"? the \"passionate\" duke? tell the hot-headed duke that i but no, not yet. maybe he's not feeling well. when we're ill we can't carry out our duties as well as when we're healthy. when our bodies are out of order, our minds can't function properly. i'll hold off, and subdue my impulsive temper, which makes me judge a sick man as if he were well. kent a curse on my royal power! why should he sit here like this? the fact that they punished him convinces me that regan and the duke are avoiding me on purpose. i want my servant released. go tell the duke and his wife i'll speak to them right now, at once. tell them to come here and hear me out, or else i'll beat a drum at their bedroom door until they can't sleep any more.", "i just want everything to be all right between you.", "oh, my heart, my heart is rising into my throat! stay down, heart."], ["that's right, uncle, talk to your heart, like the who yelled at the eels she was putting in her pie. she hit 'em on the head with a stick and shouted, \"down, you naughty things, down!\" that was the woman whose brother wanted to be nice to his , and buttered its hay.", "good morning to you both.", "hail to your majesty.", "i'm glad to see your highness.", "i believe you are, regan. you know why i think so? because if you weren't glad, i'd divorce your dead mother, because i'd know she cheated on me. any true daughter of mine would definitely be glad to see me. kent oh, are you free? we'll talk about it later.", "my dear regan, your sister's not worth anything. oh, regan, she's torn me apart with unkindness, like a vulture, right here. i can hardly speak. you'll never believe how monstrously oh, regan!"], ["calm down, sir, please. i hope there's been a misunderstanding. it's more likely that you don't know how to appreciate her than that she'd ever fail in her duties as a daughter.", "how do you mean?", "i can't believe my sister would neglect her obligations in any way. if she restrained your rowdy knights, she had such a good reason that you can't blame her for it.", "i curse her.", "sir, you're old. your life is stretched to its limit. you should let others take care of you and submit to people who know better than you do what's good for you. please go back to goneril's house. admit you were wrong.", "apologize? do you think this kind of thing is appropriate for the royal family? \"dear daughter, i admit i'm old. old people are useless. i'm begging you, on my knees, to give me food, clothes, and a bed.\"", "no more, please. these are ugly antics. go back to my sister's."], ["never, regan. she's sent away half my knights, glared at me, and aimed her venomous insults straight at my heart. she and her ingratitude can go to hell! i hope she gets sick and becomes lame!", "shush, sir, please!", "i hope lightning strikes her in the eyes! i hope poisonous swampy fog covers her face and ruins her complexion!", "oh, dear gods! that's how you'll talk about me when you're in this mood.", "no, regan. i'll never curse you. you're so gentle, you'd never be harsh like her. her eyes are vicious, but yours are comforting. you'd never deny me my pleasures, downsize my entourage, insult me thoughtlessly, reduce my allowance, or lock me out of the house. you know better than she does how important the duties of a child to a parent are, and the responsibilities that come from gratitude. you haven't forgotten the half of a kingdom i gave you.", "sir, let's get to the point.", "who put my messenger in the stocks?"], ["what's that trumpet?", "i know it. it's my sister's. she'll be here soon, just like her letter said. oswald has my sister arrived?", "this is a lowlife who basks in the reflection of the fading glory of the woman he works for. get out of my sight, scoundrel!", "what do you mean, your highness?", "who put my servant in the stocks? regan, i hope you didn't know anything about that. ah, who's this? dear gods, if you love old men like me, if you believe in obedience, if you yourselves are old, then please send me down some help! goneril aren't you ashamed to look at me after the way you've treated me in my old age? oh, regan, are you taking her by the hand?", "why shouldn't she take my hand, father? how exactly have i offended you? just because a senile man with poor judgment calls something an insult doesn't necessarily mean it is one.", "oh, how can the sides of my body hold in my grieving heart? how did my messenger wind up in the stocks?"], ["i sent him there, sir, but his crimes deserved a worse punishment.", "you! you did it?", "please, father, since you're weak, act like it. get rid of half your knights and go back to spend the rest of your month with my sister. afterward, you can stay with me. right now i'm away from home and i can't provide you with proper care.", "go back with her? send away fifty of my knights? no. i'd rather renounce living in a house, and wander in the open air in the hardships of poverty, as a friend of the wolf and the owl. go back with her? i might as well go before the king of france, who took my youngest daughter without a dowry, kneel before his throne, and beg him to give me a tiny pension to stay alive. go back with her? i'd rather be a slave or a packhorse for this hateful stablehand here. oswald", "as you wish, sir.", "i beg you, daughter, don't make me crazy. i won't bother you. we'll never see each other again. but you're still my child, my flesh and blood or rather you're a disease in my flesh, a disease i still have to call my own. you're a pustule, a sore, a tumor digesting my bloodline. but i'll stop rebuking you. you'll feel shame when the time is right, and i don't urge you to be ashamed now. i won't beg the gods to punish you, or caution you to fear their judgment. become a better"], ["person when you're ready, if you're inclined. i'll wait patiently. meanwhile i'll stay with regan with my hundred knights.", "it's not quite that simple. i wasn't expecting you, and i'm not ready to receive you. please hear what goneril is saying. we're trying to be reasonable while you're so upset, and we understand that you're old, and but goneril knows what she's doing.", "do you mean what you've just said?", "yes, i do. isn't fifty knights enough for you? why would you need more than that? or even that many. fifty knights are expensive to maintain, and there's always a risk they'll rebel. how could so many people, under two masters, get along under one roof? it would be hard, almost impossible.", "why couldn't you be attended by my servants, or by regan's?", "yes, why not, my lord? then if they're negligent, we could control them. now that i think about the danger of these knights, if you come to stay with me, please bring no more than twenty-five of them with you. i won't lodge any more than that under my roof.", "i gave you everything", "and it was about time too."], ["i made you de facto rulers of my kingdom on condition that i could keep a hundred knights of my own. why should i now have to make do with only twenty-five? regan, is that what you said?", "yes, i'll say it again, my lord. no more than twenty-five.", "bad people start to look better in comparison with worse people. not being the worst daughter deserves some praise, i guess. goneril i'll go stay with you, then. your fifty is twice her twenty-five, so you must love me twice as much as she does.", "hear me out, my lord. why do you need twenty-five knights, or ten, or even five, when you're staying in a house with a staff of double that at your service?", "why do you need even one?", "oh, don't ask me why i \"need\" them! even the poorest beggars have some meager possessions they don't really \"need.\" if you allow people no more than what they absolutely need to survive, then a human life is no better than an animal's. you're a well-dressed lady. if you dressed only to stay warm, you wouldn't need these gorgeous clothes you're wearing which don't keep you warm at all. if you want to talk about true needs, what i really need is patience. oh, gods, give me patience! you see me here, gods, a grieving old man, as wretched in his grief as he is in his old age. if you're the ones setting my daughters against me, don't let me be foolish enough to take it lying down. give me noble anger, and don't let any womanly tears fall down my"], ["man's cheeks. no, you monstrous hags, i'll get revenge on you both that will make the whole world i will do such things i don't know what i'll do exactly, but it'll be devastating. you expect me to cry? well, i won't.", "i have a good reason to cry, but my heart will splinter into a hundred thousand pieces before i let myself cry. oh, fool, i'll go mad!", "let's go inside. there's going to be a storm.", "this is a small house. there's no room for the old man and his followers.", "it's his fault that he's all worked up like this. he has to pay the price for his foolish actions.", "i'll be happy to keep him in my house, but not a single knight.", "that's what i intend to do too. where is gloucester?", "he followed the old man. here he comes back.", "the king is enraged."], ["where's he going?", "he has called for his horse, but i don't know where he's headed.", "it's best just to let him go. he won't listen to anyone's advice.", "gloucester my lord, don't try to persuade him to stay.", "ah, but it's getting dark, and the winds are strong and stormy. there's hardly a bush for miles around. he'll have no shelter.", "oh, sir, impetuous people learn their lessons from the consequences of their foolish actions. lock the doors. his attendants are desperate, violent men. i'm afraid of what they might encourage him to do, considering the state he's in.", "lock the doors, my lord. it's a wild night. regan gives good advice. come in out of the storm."], ["who's there, aside from this foul weather?", "someone whose mood is as foul as the weather, very troubled.", "i know you. where's the king?", "struggling with the wind and rain. he's shouting at the wind to blow the earth into the sea, or make the sea flood the earth he wants to see the world return to primal chaos. he keeps tearing out his white hair, which the blindly raging winds catch up and blow away into nothingness. small but brave in his surroundings, he's trying to stand up against the wind and rain blowing back and forth. he's running bareheaded, calling for the end of the world, out there on a night like this, when even savage animals ravenous with hunger crawl under cover and hide.", "but who's with him?", "nobody but the fool, who's trying to soothe the wounds in the king's heart with jokes."], ["sir, i know you, and i trust you enough to share something very important with you. there's a feud between albany and cornwall, although they've been clever enough to hide it thus far. like other powerful rulers, they have servants who are actually french spies in disguise. these spies have noticed something, perhaps in the squabbles between albany and cornwall, or in the tough line both of them have taken against the good old king, or perhaps in some deeper matter at the root of both of these problems the point is that the king of france has sent troops into our divided kingdom. some french agents are already at work in our main ports and are on the verge of declaring open war. now this is where you come in. if you trust me enough to hurry to dover, you'll earn the gratitude of many people when you fairly report the monstrous and maddening extent of the king's suffering. i'm a nobleman, and i know what i'm doing in assigning this job to you.", "let's discuss it some more."], ["gentleman no, there's no need. to assure you that i am a nobleman in disguise, here is some money. if you see cordelia as i'm sure you will show her this ring. she'll tell you who i am. damn this storm! i'll go find the king.", "let me shake your hand. do you have anything else to tell me?", "only a few more words, but they're the most important. let me go this way, and you go that way. when one of us finds the king, he'll call out to the other one."], ["blow, winds! blow until your cheeks crack! rage on, blow! let tornadoes spew water until the steeples of our churches and the weathervanes are all drowned. let quick sulfurous lightning, strong enough to split enormous trees, singe the white hair on my head. let thunder flatten the spherical world, crack open all the molds from which nature forms human beings, and spill all the seeds from which ungrateful humans grow!", "oh, uncle, it's better to smile and flatter indoors where it's dry than get soaked out here. please, uncle, let's go in and ask your daughters to forgive you. this storm has no pity for either wise men or fools.", "let thunder rumble! let lightning spit fire! let the rain spray! the rain, the wind, the thunder and lightning are not my daughters. nature, i don't accuse your weather of unkindness. i never gave you a kingdom or raised you as my child, and you don't owe me any obedience. so go ahead and have your terrifying fun. here i am, your slave a poor, sick, weak, hated old man. but i can still accuse you of kowtowing, taking my daughters' side against me, ancient as i am. oh, it's foul!", "anyone who has a house to cover his head has a good head on his shoulders. the guy who finds a place to put his penis before he has a house of his own will wind up dirt poor and covered with lice"], ["with a crowd of slut daughters to add to the slut wife. the man who kicks away the person he should love will bring himself pain and sleepless nights. for there never was a pretty woman who didn't like to preen in the mirror.", "no, i'll be patient. i won't say a word.", "who's there?", "a wise man and a fool.", "lear ah, sir, you're here? even creatures of the night aren't out tonight in this storm. the angry skies terrify the animals that usually prowl in the dark, making them stay in their caves. never in my life have i heard such horrible blasts of thunder, such a roaring downpour, such groaning winds. it's too trying and terrifying for humans to bear.", "let the gods who stirred up this dreadful storm bring their enemies to light. any wretched person who has committed secret crimes and escaped justice should tremble in fear now. better hide now, you murderers, you perjurers, you incest-practicing people who pretend to be virtuous. tremble and shake, villain, for secretly plotting against human lives. let all your bottled-up crimes come flooding out at last, as you beg for"], ["mercy from the gods who summon these terrifying winds and thunderbolts. other people have sinned against me more than i have sinned against them.", "why, you're not even wearing a hat? my lord, there's a hut nearby. it will give you some protection from this storm. rest there while i go back to the unfriendly house where your sisters are staying, and ask them for help. they are harder than the stones the house is made of. just now, when i asked them if they knew where you were, they wouldn't let me in. but i'll go back and force them to be polite.", "i'm starting to lose my mind. fool come on, my boy. how are you? are you cold? i'm cold myself. kent where's this hut, man? odd how when you're desperate, even shoddy things like this hut can seem precious. show me where that hut is. poor fool, part of me still feels sorry for you.", "", "that's true, my good boy. come on, take us to that hut."], ["this would be a great night to satisfy a whore's lust. i'll recite a prophecy before i go. one day, when priests don't practice what they preach, when brewers dilute their beer with water, when noblemen teach their tailors how to sew, when instead of heretics being burned at the stake, lovers are burned by syphilis, when every law case is tried fairly, when no gentleman is in debt, when no one slanders anyone else, and thieves don't snatch wallets in crowds, when moneylenders count their gold in the open air, and pimps and whores build fine churches then the kingdom of england will come to ruin. and whoever lives to see that day will walk with his feet. this is the prophecy that the wizard will make one day. i'm a little ahead of my time in saying it now."], ["oh, oh, edmund, i don't like this monstrous business. when asked the duke and duchess of cornwall if i could take pity on the king and shelter him from the storm, they took my house away from me and ordered me never to talk about him, lobby for him, or support him in any way.", "that's uncivilized and unnatural!", "oh, be quiet. there's a feud between the two dukes. and there's something even worse than that. i got a letter tonight. it's dangerous to talk about it. i've locked it up in my room. the humiliation that the king is suffering now will be revenged thoroughly. armed forces have already landed. we have to take the king's side. i'll look for him and secretly help him. you go and talk to the duke so he won't notice i'm helping the king. if he asks to see me, tell him i'm sick and went to bed. even if i have to die as they threaten i have to help the king. strange things are about to happen, edmund. please be careful.", "i'll tell the duke right away that you're going to see the king, which is forbidden. and i'll tell him about the letter too. you'll get what you deserve, and i'll be rewarded with everything you lose in other words, all your lands. the young generation rises while the old one falls."], ["here's the hut, my lord. please go inside. the night's too rough for humans to bear.", "leave me for a bit.", "my lord, here is the entrance.", "will you break my heart?", "i'd rather break my own heart. now please go in.", "you think it's a big deal that this fierce storm is soaking me to the skin. it's a big deal to you. but whenever you feel a larger pain, the smaller one disappears. you would run away from a bear, but if the only way to run was into the stormy ocean, you'd turn around and confront the bear. when your mind is at peace, your body is sensitive to the elements. but this storm in my mind keeps me from feeling anything except what's tormenting me how ungrateful my children are! isn't their ingratitude like the mouth biting the hand that feeds it? but i'll punish them thoroughly. no, i won't cry any more. imagine them locking me out on a night like this! but let it rain; i'll survive. on a night like this! oh, regan, goneril, your kind old father whose generous heart gave you everything oh, if i think about that i'll go mad. i want to avoid that. no more of these thoughts."], ["my lord, please go inside here.", "go inside yourself. make yourself comfortable. this storm protects me from thoughts that would hurt me more. but i'll go in. fool you go in first, boy. oh, you suffering homeless people no, you go in. i'll pray first, then i'll sleep.", "poor homeless creatures suffering this storm, wherever you are, how will you survive a night like this with no roof over your heads, no fat on your sides to keep you warm, and only rags for clothes? when i was king i didn't do enough to help you. powerful men, take your medicine by learning about hardship. go out and feel what the impoverished feel. then you can give them your extra wealth and make the world more fair.", "the water in here is nine feet deep! poor tom!", "don't come in here, uncle! there's a spirit in here! help me, help me!", "give me your hand. who's there?", "a ghost, a ghost! he says his name's poor tom.", "who are you, moaning in the hut like that? come out."], ["go away! the devil's after me! the cold wind blows through the hawthorn trees. ha! get into your cold beds and warm yourselves up.", "did you give everything to your two daughters and end up like this?", "whoever gave a thing to poor tom? the devil has chased him through fires, across rivers and whirlpools, and over swamps. the devil has put knives under tom's pillow and hangman's ropes in his church pew, encouraging him to kill himself. the devil has put rat poison next to poor tom's oatmeal and made him gallop his horse over narrow bridges, chasing his own shadow as if it were a traitor. bless your five senses! tom's chilly. oh do-de, do-de, do-de. god protect you from tornadoes, evil stars, and diseases! take pity on poor tom, who is persecuted by the devil. i can almost catch him. there! and over there! and over there!", "have his daughters made him crazy like this? couldn't you have kept something for yourself? did you have to give them everything?", "no, he kept a blanket to cover himself with. if he hadn't, we'd all be embarrassed to look at him.", "then may your daughters be cursed with all the horrible fates that await sinners!", "he doesn't have any daughters, sir."], ["like hell! nothing but cruel daughters could have degraded him like this. is it fashionable now for neglected fathers to get so little pity? that's a fair punishment! i'm the one who fathered those bloodsucking daughters.", "sat on pillicock hill. la, la, la, la!", "this stormy night will turn us all into fools and madmen.", "beware of the devil. obey your parents, keep your word, don't swear, don't sleep with another man's wife, and don't covet flashy clothes. tom's chilly.", "what were you before this?", "i used to be an honorable devoted servant who curled his hair, wore his mistress's glove in his hat as a token of her affection, and slept with his mistress whenever she wanted. i swore oaths with every other word out of my mouth, and broke the oaths shamelessly. i used to dream of having sex and wake up to do it. i loved wine and gambling, and had more women than a turkish sultan keeps in his harem. i was disloyal and violent. i eavesdropped. i was as lazy as a hog, as sneaky as a fox, as greedy as a wolf, as mad as a dog, and as ruthless as a lion. don't ever let a woman know what you're thinking. stay away from whores, don't chase skirts, don't borrow money, and resist the devil. the cold wind's still blowing through the hawthorn tree. dauphin, my boy, stop that. let the horse go by."], ["you'd be better off dead than facing the storm as naked as you are. is this all a human being is? look at him. edgar you are not indebted to animals for your clothes since don't wear silk, leather, or wool not even . ha! the three of us are sophisticated compared to you. you're the real thing. the human being unburdened by the trappings of civilization is no more than a poor, naked, two-legged animal like you. off with these clothes borrowed from animals! let me unbutton this.", "please calm down, uncle. this is a nasty night to go swimming. on a night like this a campfire in an empty field would be like the heart of a dirty old man a tiny spark in a cold body. look, here comes a walking fire.", "this is the devil flibbertigibbet. he gets up at nightfall and wanders around till dawn. he can make your eyes squint and film over and give you a harelip. he rots ripened wheat and hurts the poor creatures of the earth. saint withold crossed the field three times, he met a she-demon and her nine kids, he told her to promise to stop doing harm. and go away, witch, go away.", "how are you, your highness?", "gloucester who's that?", "who are you? what do you want?"], ["who are you? what are your names?", "poor tom, who eats frogs, toads, tadpoles, lizards, and newts. when the devil tells me to, i eat cow dung for salads, i swallow old rats and dead dogs, i drink pond scum. in every village i'm whipped and put in the stocks, punished and imprisoned. but i used to be a respectable servant, with three suits and six shirts. once i had a horse to ride and a sword to wear, but now poor tom's been eating rats and mice for seven long years. beware of the devil who follows me around. calm down, smulkin, you fiend!", "lear don't you have anyone more respectable with you, your highness?", "oh, the devil is quite a gentleman. he's called modo and mahu.", "lear my lord, our children have become so beastly that they hate their own parents.", "poor tom's chilly.", "come back to my house with me. i couldn't bear to obey all of your daughters' harsh orders. they commanded me to lock my doors and leave you out in this merciless storm, but i've come out here to find you and take you where there's warmth and food.", "first let me talk with this philosopher here. edgar what causes thunder?"], ["lear sir, please take him up on his offer and go back with him.", "i want to chat a bit with this wise man. what kind of philosophy do you study?", "how to keep the devil away and kill rats.", "let me ask you something in private.", "gloucester ask him again to return with you, my lord. he's beginning to lose his mind.", "can you blame him?", "his daughters want to kill him. ah, good old kent said this would happen that poor, banished man. you say the king is losing his mind. let me tell you, my friend, i'm almost insane myself. i had a son, whom i've legally disowned. he tried to kill me recently, very recently. i loved him, as much as any father ever loved his son. to tell you the truth, i'm crazed with grief."], ["what a storm! lear your highness, please, i'm begging you", "excuse me, sir. edgar noble philosopher, come talk to me.", "tom's chilly.", "get into the hut, man. stay warm.", "come on, let's all go inside.", "this way, my lord.", "edgar i'll go with him. i want to stay with my philosopher.", "gloucester my lord, calm him down. let him take that guy inside too.", "all right, bring him along.", "edgar boy, come along with us.", "come on, my dear greek philosopher.", "hush, don't talk.", "the young knight roland came to the dark tower. he said, \"fee, fie, fo, fum, i smell the blood of an englishman.\""], ["i'll get my revenge before i leave this house.", "i'm afraid to think how i'll be criticized for letting my natural affection for my father give way to my loyalty to you.", "now i realize your brother tried to kill your father not just because your brother is an evil man, but because your father deserved it by being wicked himself.", "how unlucky am i, having to apologize for doing the right thing! cornwall this is the letter he was talking about, and it confirms he was a spy for france. oh god, i wish he had never betrayed us, or that i hadn't been the one to discover his treason.", "come with me to see the duchess.", "if this letter's right, you've got a lot to deal with.", "right or not, it's made you the earl of gloucester. go find your father and let him know we're going to arrest him.", "if i catch my father helping the king, he'll seem even more guily. cornwall i'll do what i must loyally, even though it pains me to take action against my father.", "i put my trust in you. you'll see that i'm a better father to you than gloucester."], ["it's better here than outside. be happy about it. i'll do what i can to make you even more comfortable. i won't be gone long.", "he can't bear his grief and so he's losing his mind. may god reward you for your kindness!", "the devil frateretto is telling me that the diabolical roman emperor likes to go fishing in hell. pray to the gods, you fool, and beware the foul devil.", "here's a riddle, uncle. is the lunatic a gentleman or an ordinary guy?", "he's a king, a king!", "no, he's an ordinary guy who 's got a gentleman for a son, since someone would have to be crazy to let his son become a gentleman before he's achieved that distinction himself.", "i see regan and goneril in hell a thousand hissing devils with sizzling red pitchforks come up to them!", "the nasty devil's biting my butt."], ["you've got to be crazy to trust a wolf that pretends to be tame, a horse that seems healthy, a teenager in love, or a whore who swears she'll be faithful.", "i'll do it. i'll put them on right now. edgar come sit here, our able judge. fool and you sit here, wise sir. now, you she-foxes", "there he is, standing and glaring at me! hey, lady, can't you see how the judge is?", "", "the devil sings like a nightingale to haunt poor tom. the demon hoppedance is in tom's belly, crying for some fish to eat. stop whining, devil. i've got no food to give you.", "lear how are you, sir? please don't stand there in a daze. wouldn't you like to lie down on the pillows?", "no, i want to see their trial first. let's have the evidence. edgar take your place, honorable judge. fool and you, his fellow justice of the peace, sit next to him. kent you can also be a judge. sit down as well.", "let's give a fair verdict."], ["", "let's put goneril on trial first. there she is. i hereby swear before this honored assembly that she kicked her father when he was down.", "come here, ma'am. is your name goneril?", "she can't deny it.", "i'm so sorry, ma'am, i thought you were a good person, a well-made chair instead of a crude stool.", "and here's regan, whose grotesque face betrays her twisted heart. stop her! guards, guards, use your weapons. fire! the courtroom is in chaos. you corrupt judge, why did you let her escape?", "bless your heart.", "lear how sorrowful! sir, where's the self-control you used to be so proud of?", "i feel so sorry for him that my tears are starting to ruin my disguise.", "look at the three little dogs, tray, blanch, and sweetheart all barking at me.", "tom will chase them off. go away, you mongrels! whether you bite to kill, mastiff, greyhound, or ugly mutt,"], ["hound or spaniel, bitch or dog, whether your tail is short or curly tom will make you cry and wail. with one little toss of his head, he can scare you off for good. whether your mouth is black or white, do-dee, dee-dee da. stop! run off, go visit fairs and festivals! poor tom, your cup is empty.", "now let them dissect regan and her hard heart. is there any natural cause for hardening of the heart? edgar sir, you can serve me as one of my hundred knights. but i don't like your style of clothes. i'm sure you'll tell me they're fabulous, but i think you should change them anyway.", "please lie down and rest a while, my lord.", "be quiet, be quiet. draw the curtains, just like that. we'll have supper in the morning. that's right.", "and i'll go to bed at noon.", "kent come here, my friend. where's my master the king?", "he's here, sir, but please don't bother him. he's out of his right mind.", "please get him, my friend, i beg you. i've overheard people plotting to kill him. i have a carriage ready. put"], ["him inside and take him to dover, where you'll find people who'll welcome and protect him. carry your master out. if you waste even half an hour, he'll be killed, along with you and everyone else helping him. bring him here, carry him and follow me. i'll quickly take you to where you can find supplies.", "lear's suffering has finally put him to sleep. lear this rest might have calmed your shattered nerves. it will be difficult for you to get better now that rest is impossible. fool come on, help me carry your master. you can't stay here.", "come on, come on.", "when we see that our betters have the same problems we do, we can almost forget our own misery. the person who suffers alone suffers the most. companions in sorrow alleviate our grief. my troubles seem so easy to bear now that i see the king collapsing under a similar sorrow. his children have done the same to him as my father has to me. let's go, tom. we'll pay attention to the political situation, and you'll be able to reveal your true identity when you're proven innocent. whatever else happens tonight, i hope the king escapes safely! lurk out of sight."], ["goneril hurry to your husband. show him this letter. the french army has landed. find the traitor gloucester.", "hang him immediately.", "gouge out his eyes!", "leave him to my wrath. edmund, go with my sister-in-law. you shouldn't have to see the punishment we inflict on your father. tell the duke of albany to prepare for war immediately. we will do the same. we'll keep the lines of communication open between us. goneril goodbye, my dear sister-in-law. edmund goodbye, lord gloucester.", "hello. where's the king?", "lord gloucester has helped him leave. thirty-five or thirty-six of his knights met him at the gate, and together with some others they've set off for dover, where they claim to have powerful friends."], ["prepare the horses for your lady.", "goodbye, my sweet lord. goodbye, my sister.", "goodbye, edmund.", "go find the traitor gloucester. tie him up like a thief and bring him here to me.", "i can't condemn him to death without a formal trial, but i'm powerful enough that i can still do to express my anger. some men may blame me for doing this, but they won't be able to do anything about it. who's there? is that the traitor?", "ungrateful traitor! that's him.", "tie up his withered old arms.", "what are you doing? my friends, remember that you're my guests here. don't play any nasty tricks on me.", "tie him up, i tell you."], ["tie him up harder. you filthy traitor!", "i'm not a traitor, unfair lady.", "tie him to this chair. you'll see, criminal", "by the gods, it's disgraceful for you to pull my beard.", "as old and white-haired as you are, and you're such a traitor?", "wicked woman, these white hairs you're pulling off my chin will come to life and accuse you of wrong-doing. you are my guests. this is no way to treat a host who has welcomed you into his house. what do you think you're doing?", "tell us about the letters that you got from france.", "get to the point, since we already know the truth.", "and what's your connection with the traitors who landed in our kingdom recently?", "the ones you've sent our lunatic king to. tell us.", "i got a letter that made some guesses about what was going on, without any proof. it came from a neutral party, not from someone opposed to you.", "how clever of you."], ["clever lies.", "where have you sent the king?", "to dover.", "why dover? weren't you ordered, on penalty of", "why dover? let him answer that question first.", "i'm backed into a corner with nowhere to run.", "why dover?", "because i didn't want to watch while you gouged out his poor old eyes with your cruel fingernails, or while your vicious sister sank her fangs into his sacred flesh. you left him out in the storm in the black night, bareheaded, a storm so terrible that if it had happened at sea, the waters would have risen up and extinguished the fire burning in the stars. and the poor old man just wept, mixing his tears with the rain. if wolves had been howling outside your gate at the heart of that storm, you would've told your doorman to let them in, despite all the cruelties you inflict on the world. but soon i'll see the gods punish you for your lack of respect to your father.", "you won't be seeing anything. hold his chair still, men. i'm going to put my foot on his eyes.", "oh, help me, anyone who wants to live long!"], ["oh, so cruel! oh dear gods!", "now he's a little crooked. gouge out the other eye too.", "if you see vengeance", "stop, my lord! i've served you since childhood, but i've never done you a better service than telling you to stop.", "what's this, you dog?", "i am willing to fight you if i must. what do you mean by all this?", "my peasant, acting like this?", "come on then. over my dead body.", "give me your sword. a lowly peasant defying his lord like this? first servant", "i am dying! my lord, you still have one eye left to see cornwall punished. oh!", "we'll just have to stop him from seeing ever again. out, vile jelly, pop out of your eye sockets!"], ["gloucester where's your sparkle now?", "nothing but darkness and horror. where's my son edmund? edmund, let your love for me ignite your bloodlust to avenge this horrible crime!", "wrong, evil traitor. you're appealing to a son who hates you. he was the one who revealed your treason to us. he's too good to have any compassion for you.", "what a fool i've been! this means i've mistreated edgar. dear god, forgive me. let him be well!", "kick him out of the gate. he can sniff his way to dover.", "cornwall what is it, my lord? why do you look like that?", "i'm wounded. follow me, madam. throw the blind traitor outside. and throw this dead peasant into the manure pit. regan, i'm bleeding. it's a bad time for such an injury. give me your arm.", "if our criminal master gets off free, i won't care what happens to me anymore.", "if she lives a long and happy life, then all women may as well turn into monsters."], ["let's follow the old earl, and get that crazy tom to take him wherever he wants to go. as a wandering lunatic, he can do whatever he wants.", "go ahead. i'll get some cloth and egg whites to bandage his bleeding face. heaven help him!"], ["still, i'm better off now, as a beggar who is openly hated, than when i was flattered to my face hated in secret. the lowliest and most dejected creatures live without fear and still harbor hope. the worst kind of change is when good fortune turns sour. at the bottom, any change is for the better. so i welcome this wind freely. i've sunk as far down as i can go, so i've got nothing more to fear from the weather.", "but who is this? my father, led by a poor peasant? oh, life is full of surprises! we age and die because they wear us out.", "gloucester my good lord, i've rented land from you and your father for eighty years.", "away, get out of here. leave me, my friend. there's nothing you can do to help me now, and being with me puts your life in danger.", "but you can't see where you're going, sir.", "i don't have anywhere to go, so i don't need to see. when i could see, i didn't always see clearly. i made"], ["mistakes, i stumbled and fell. it's often the case that having something makes us spoiled, while not having it turns out to be advantageous. so may it be with my eyesight. oh, my dear son edgar, how enraged i was at you when i was deceived. if i live long enough to touch you again, that would be as good as having my eyesight back.", "who's that? who's there?", "oh, gods! who can ever say, \"this is as bad as it can get\"? i'm worse off now than ever before.", "gloucester it's poor crazy tom.", "and my life could still be worse. if you have the presence of mind to say, \"this is the worst,\" then it's not the worst yet.", "edgar where are you going, man?", "is it a beggar?", "yes, he's both crazy and a beggar.", "well, he can't be completely crazy, or he wouldn't be able to beg. last night during the storm i saw a man who was both poor and crazy. he made me think that men are as weak and insignificant as worms. i was reminded of my son, even though i despised my son at that time. now i know better. the gods play around with us as cruelly as schoolboys who pull the wings off flies."], ["what's going on? i hate pretending i'm a wandering beggar when all i want to do now is comfort my poor father. bless you, master.", "is that the naked guy?", "yes, my lord.", "old man then please go. if you're willing to do me a favor, as an old friend, then catch up to us a mile or two further on the way to dover, and bring some clothes for this poor beggar. i'll ask him to be my guide.", "but sir, he's crazy.", "it's the tragedy of our times that lunatics must lead the blind. do as i asked you. or rather, do what you feel like doing. but above all, get out of here.", "i'll bring the crazy beggar the best clothes i have, no matter what happens.", "hey, naked guy", "poor tom's chilly. i can't play this role any longer.", "come here, man.", "but i must. bless you, sir. your dear eyes are bleeding.", "do you know the way to dover?"], ["i know it like the back of my hand, every step of the way. poor tom has been scared out of his mind. bless you, good man, and stay away from the devil. five devils haunted poor tom at the same time: obidicut, the devil of lust; hobbididence, the devil of mutes; mahu, the devil of stealing; modo, the devil of murder; and flibbertigibbet, the devil of mockery, who causes chambermaids to make silly faces. bless you, master.", "edgar here, take some money. the torments of heaven have brought you down to this humble state. my misery makes you more fortunate in comparison. it should always work like that. the spoiled man who has everything, who can't see the misery around him because he doesn't feel it himself, should be made to feel agony so he can learn to share his wealth. that way wealth would be redistributed until everyone has enough to survive. are you familiar with dover?", "yes, sir.", "there's a cliff there that leans precariously over the deep sea. take me to the edge of it, and i'll reward all your troubles with something valuable. once i'm there, i won't need a guide anymore.", "give me your arm. poor tom will take you there."], ["welcome, my lord. i'm surprised my bland husband didn't meet me on the way here.", "where's your master?", "he's inside, ma'am, but he has changed dramatically since you last saw him. when i told him that the invading army has landed, he just smiled at me. when i told him you were on your way, he replied, \"too bad.\" when i told him about gloucester's betrayal and his son edmund's loyal service, he called me an idiot and said i had it all wrong. he was delighted by the bad news and disgusted by the good news.", "edmund then don't come in with me. he's a coward and can't commit himself to doing anything risky. he chooses not to be insulted rather than challenge those who offend him. but what we talked about with longing on the way may soon come true. , go back to see my brother-in-law. gather his soldiers and organize his troops. i plan to take charge of my household. from now on i will wear the pants, and my husband can play the housewife. we can trust oswald to carry messages between us. if you act boldly, you will soon obey me as your true mistress. take this as a token of my esteem. don't speak. lean down. this kiss should encourage you. i hope you understand me. goodbye, and good luck."], ["i'm at your service until death.", "my dear gloucester!", "what a man! especially compared to my husband. edmund, you deserve me to be your woman. there's a fool sharing my bed now.", "ma'am, my master's coming.", "so you finally find me worthy of your attentions.", "goneril, you aren't worth the dust the wind blows in your face. i don't trust you. you can't trust anyone who abuses her own father, her flesh and blood. a woman who breaks off relations with her bloodline is like a branch that tries to break away from the tree. she will wither and come to a bad end.", "oh, shut up. your words are idiotic.", "bad people can't appreciate wisdom or goodness. they only like things as bad as themselves. what have you two sisters done? you're tigers, not daughters. barbaric degenerates, you've driven insane a kindly old father, whom even an angry bear would treat gent-ly. could my good brother-in-law a man to whom the"], ["king gave half his kingdom have allowed you to do it? if the heavens don't punish these crimes immediately, the end will come. human beings will become cannibals, like ravenous sea fishes.", "coward! you take everything lying down, you just turn the other cheek you can't even see the difference between being honored and being taken advantage of! if we punish before they have a chance to commit their crimes, you're a fool to pity them. why aren't you preparing for war? the french have invaded our peaceful country. your territory is at risk, and all you can do is sit around like a preachy fool and whine, \"ah, why is he doing that?\"", "look at yourself, devilish shrew! a woman deformed by hatred and rage is more horrifying than the devil! at least the devil is to look that way.", "you useless fool!", "shame on you, warped hag! your true demonic features are distorting your body. if i let myself do what i yearn to, i'd rip the flesh off your bones. but i won't attack a woman, even if she is a demon.", "i sneeze on your manhood. ha!"], ["what news do you bring?", "oh my lord, the duke of cornwall's dead. he was killed by his servant as he about to gouge out glouces-ter's other eye.", "gloucester's eyes?", "a servant gloucester had raised in his house, full of compunction, opposed the blinding and turned his sword on the duke of cornwall. enraged, cornwall attacked and killed the servant, but not without receiving his own wound, of which he later died.", "there's justice in heaven after all! that these crimes are punished so quickly is proof. but oh, poor glou-cester! did he lose his other eye?", "he lost both, my lord. ma'am, this letter is from your sister, and needs an immediate answer.", "in a way i'm glad to hear that cornwall is dead. but on the other hand, edmund is traveling with regan, who is now a widow. if something happens between them on the road, it would shatter my hopes of having edmund for myself and escaping this hateful life. still, there are benefits to having cornwall out of the way. i'll read this letter and answer it."], ["where was gloucester's son edmund when they gouged his eyes out?", "he was on his way here with your wife.", "but he isn't here now.", "no, my lord. i met him going back again.", "does he know about this wicked crime?", "yes, my lord. he was the one who denounced his father. he then left the house specifically so that the punishment might be carried out without concern for their father-son bond.", "gloucester, i'll thank you forever for the love you've shown the king. i'll get revenge for what they did to your eyes. come here, my friend. what else you do know?"], ["do you know why the king of france suddenly went back home?", "he'd left some unfinished business, which he remembered after arriving here. it was urgent and important enough to require his personal presence.", "whom did he leave in charge here?", "the marshal of france, monsieur la far.", "was queen cordelia aggrieved by the letters you delivered?", "yes, sir. she took the letters and read them in front of me. now and then a large tear trickled down her delicate cheek. she seemed to be trying to control her emotions, which were overwhelming her.", "so she was moved by it?", "there were no outbursts. she was struggling between emotion and self-control. you've seen how it can rain while the sun shines? that's how she was, smiling and crying at once, only more lovely. the little smile on her full lips didn't seem aware of the tears that were dropping like diamonds from her pearly eyes. if everyone looked so lovely in their sorrow, then sorrow would be highly prized."], ["she didn't ask anything?", "actually, once or twice she sighed and said, \"father,\" as if the word were pressing on her chest. once she exclaimed, \"sisters, sisters, shame on you! kent, father, sisters! what, out in a storm in the middle of the night? i can't believe it.\" the tears fell from her eyes like holy water. then she ran away to grieve alone.", "it must be fate that makes us who we are otherwise someone as good as cordelia could not possibly be related to those two witches. have you not spoken to her since then?", "no.", "did this happen before the king of france returned home?", "no, afterward.", "well, sir, poor delirious lear is in town. sometimes when he's lucid he remembers why we're here, and absolutely refuses to see his daughter.", "why, good sir?", "he's too overwhelmed with shame. he remembers how unkind he was to her, how he disowned her and sent her abroad, how he gave her rightful inheritance to her two dog-hearted sisters. all those memories pain his mind so deeply that guilt and shame keep him away from cordelia."], ["oh, the poor man!", "have you heard about albany's and cornwall's troops?", "i have. they're on the march.", "well, sir, i'll take you to lear and have you stay with him a while. i have important business that requires me to remain in disguise a while longer. when i've revealed my true identity, you'll be glad you took the time to help me out. please come with me."], ["sadly, it's the king that's missing. they saw him just now as mad and deranged as the stormy sea, singing loudly, wearing a crown of nettles, thorns, hemlock, and all the other weeds that grow in our cornfields. send out a hundred soldiers to find him. search high and low, in every acre of the fields, and bring him here for me to see him.", "what can human knowledge do to make him sane again? i'd give all my wealth to whoever can help him.", "there is a way, ma'am. nature heals people with rest, which lear hasn't had. but there are many herbs that will help him rest and take his mind off his anguish for a while.", "then i'll water all those precious herbs with my tears to make them grow. may they relieve a sick old man's suffering. go find those herbs for him, before his madness puts his life in danger.", "i have news, ma'am. the british forces are on their way here."], ["we already knew that. our forces are ready for them. oh, father, i'm taking care of your business. that's why the king of france listened to my pleas and tears. we're not invading england out of ambition or greed, but out of love dear love! and my father's right to his kingdom. i hope i see him and hear him again soon."], ["have my brother-in-law's troops been mobilized?", "yes, ma'am.", "is he there in person?", "yes, making a big fuss. your sister's the better soldier of the two.", "lord edmund didn't speak to your master at home?", "no, ma'am.", "what could my sister's letter to him say?", "i don't know, ma'am.", "he rushed away on serious business. it was a huge mistake to let old gloucester live after we blinded him. wherever he goes, he inspires compassion and people turn against us. i think edmund went off to kill him, to put him out of his blind misery. and also to find out the size of the enemy army.", "i have to follow him and give him the letter.", "our troops are deployed tomorrow. stay with us tonight. it's dangerous out there."], ["i can't, ma'am. my lady ordered me to deliver her letter.", "why would she write to edmund? couldn't you just deliver the message orally? it probably has something to do with i don't know. i'll be so grateful to you if you let me open that letter.", "ma'am, i'd rather", "i know your lady goneril doesn't love her husband. i'm sure of that. and when she was here recently she flirted with edmund and gave him significant glances. i know she trusts you and tells you everything.", "me, ma'am?", "i know what i'm talking about. you're close to her, i know it. so i recommend you take note of what i'm about to say. my husband is dead. edmund and i have talked, and it makes more sense for him to marry me than goneril. you can figure out the rest. if you find him, please him this. and when your mistress hears about all this, please tell her to use her head next time. so goodbye. if you happen to hear anything about that blind traitor gloucester, i'll reward anyone who snuffs him out.", "if i could run into him, ma'am, i'd prove which side i'm on.", "goodbye."], ["when will we get to the top of that cliff?", "we're walking up to the top right now. see how hard it is to climb?", "the ground feels flat to me.", "no, it's dreadfully steep. listen. do you hear the sea?", "no, really, i don't.", "then your other senses must be getting worse because of the trauma of blindness.", "it may be so. it seems to me that your voice has changed, and that your speech is more elegant than it used to be.", "you're mistaken about all that. the only thing different about me is my clothes.", "i think you're more articulate.", "come on, sir. this is the place. stand still. it's so scary to look down! it makes me dizzy. the crows flying down below look as small as ants. halfway down the cliff there's somebody clinging to the rock and gathering wild herbs a risky business! he looks like a dot to me. the fishermen walking along the beach are as small as mice. that big ship over there looks no bigger"], ["than its lifeboat, and its lifeboat looks as small as a tiny buoy. up here you can't even hear the waves crashing against the rocks. i have to stop looking, or my head will start spinning and i'll fall.", "lead me to where you're standing.", "give me your hand. you're now within a foot of the cliff's edge. i wouldn't try to jump up and down here for anything on earth.", "let go of my hand. edgar here's another purse, my friend. inside it there's a jewel that any poor man would be happy to have. i hope it's only the beginning of future prosperity for you. now go further away. say goodbye to me, and let me hear your footsteps as you walk away.", "goodbye, good sir.", "with all my heart.", "i'm toying with his despair to cure him of it.", "oh, you mighty gods! i hereby renounce this world and all my troubles and torments. if i could bear them better, and not fight against your unstoppable decisions, then i would simply wait until i expired naturally. if edgar's alive, bless him, gods! now, man, goodbye."], ["gone, sir. goodbye. but i still wonder if it's possible for his own imagination to kill him, since he's so willing to die. if he'd been standing on the edge of the cliff as he thought, he'd be dead right now. is he alive or dead? hey, sir, friend! can you hear me? answer me. maybe he passed away after all. but no, he's stirring. who are you, sir?", "go away and let me die.", "even if you were made of feathers and air, you should've been smashed in pieces like an egg after falling as far as you just did. but your flesh is solid, your mind is strong, you're breathing and talking, you're not bleeding. you just fell the height of ten ship masts, straight down. it's a miracle you're alive. say something again.", "but did i fall or not?", "you fell from the terrifying top of this chalk cliff. look for yourself see the top of the cliff way up there? the lark shrilly singing up there is too far away to be heard. just look.", "i can't. i have no eyes. if you're wretched and desperate, aren't you allowed to kill yourself? it used to be the last ditch comfort of miserable people.", "give me your arm. get up. there you go. how do you feel? can you feel your legs? you're standing.", "only too well."], ["this is beyond weird. what was that thing i saw moving away from you up on the cliff before you fell?", "that was a poor unlucky beggar.", "from down here, i thought his eyes looked like full moons. he had a thousand noses and twisted horns, like wave crests in a storm at sea. it was some devil. you lucky old man, it seems that the gods have saved your life. they love to perform miracles so that humans will worship them.", "i understand now. from now on i'll put up with my anguish until the anguish itself cries out, \"enough, enough!\" and disappears. i thought that thing you're talking about was a man. it would often talk about the devil. it took me to that deadly place.", "cheer up and be at peace.", "but who is that? a sane person would never dress like this.", "no, they can't accuse me of counterfeiting coins. i'm the king himself.", "oh, what a heartbreaking sight!", "life's better at than art is. hey, a new recruit. here's your enlistment bonus. look how awkwardly he handles his crossbow. come on, pull it back farther! look, look, a mouse! calm down, this"], ["piece of cheese will get him. i challenge you to a match. i'll even fight a giant. call out the infantry. oh, that arrow was well shot. whoosh! right in the bull's eye. what's the password?", "sweet marjoram.", "that's it!", "i know that voice.", "ha! goneril with a white beard? ha, regan? they flattered me and told me how wise i was, wise before my time. to agree to everything i said was not truly devout. the rain came to drench me, and the wind to make me shiver, and the thunder wouldn't stop roaring when i ordered it to. that's when i learned the truth about them. that's when i sniffed them out. i tell you, they are not honest men. they told me i was everything. it's a lie. i'm not immune to chills.", "i recognize something about that voice. isn't that the king?", "yes, every inch a king. my subjects tremble when i look at them. i pardon that man. what are you accused of? adultery? i'll commute your death sentence. to die for adultery? no. little birds do it, and dragonflies copulate right in front of me. let's have more sex in the world, since gloucester's bastard son was kinder to him than my daughters, conceived in lawful wedlock, have been to me. get to it, be lustful, sleep around i need soldiers for my army. look at that simpering lady over there. from looking at her face, i'd say she's"], ["frigid. she pretends to be virtuous and to disdain the word \"sex, but she's hornier than a passel of rabbits. women are sex machines below the waist, though they're chaste up above. above the waist they belong to god, but the lower part belongs to the devil. that's where hell is, and darkness, and fires and stench! death and orgasm! ah, ah, ah! give me an aphrodisiac, pharmacist. let me have sweet dreams. there's money in it for you.", "oh, let me kiss his hand!", "let me wipe it off first. it stinks of death.", "a ruined man! this is how the whole world will end up, worn away to nothing. do you know who i am?", "i remember your eyes quite well. are you squinting at me? go ahead, try to make me fall in love, blind . i won't ever love again. read this letter. just look at the handwriting.", "if every letter on that page were a sun, i couldn't see even one of them.", "i wouldn't believe this if i weren't seeing it with my own eyes. it's real, and it breaks my heart.", "read it.", "how? with my eye sockets?", "oh ho, is that what you're getting at? you want money before you'll read? no eyes in your head til there's money in your wallet? your eyes are in a bad way, your wallet's empty, but you understand the ways of the world."], ["i do understand, by touch.", "what, are you crazy? you don't need eyes to see how the world works. look with your ears. look how the judge yells at a simple thief. listen. but mix them up, have them switch places, and do you think you'd be able to tell which one is which? have you seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar?", "yes, sir.", "and you saw how the beggar ran from the mutt? that's authority! even a dog is obeyed sometimes. you stupid cop, stop your violence! why are you whipping that whore? you should be whipping yourself, since you lust after her and yearn to do the same thing for which you're punishing her. one criminal punishes another. poor men's sins are much more noticeable than rich men's. cover up a crime with gold and the arm of justice can't touch it. but dress the crime in rags and it's caught easily. everyone sins. you can't blame anyone for it anyone, i say. i'll vouch for that. believe me, my friend, since i have the power to stop the prosecutors. get yourself some glass eyes, and pretend to see things you can't, like a crooked politician. now, now, now, now. pull off my boots. harder, harder. like that.", "oh, wisdom and absurdity mixed up together! reason in madness!"], ["if you want to cry over my bad luck, i'll give you my eyes. i know you. your name's gloucester. you have to be patient with me. i came here crying. the first time we see the world as newborns, we cry and scream. i'll read you a sermon. listen to this.", "oh, how awful!", "when we're born, we cry because we've arrived on the stage of life, like all the other fools. that's a nice hat you've got there. how ingenious to make horseshoes out of felt. i'll test it out. and when i've sneaked up on my sons-in-law, then i'll kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!", "lear oh, here he is. grab him. sir, your most dear daughter", "what, i'm a prisoner? no rescue for me? my luck has always been bad. treat me well. there's a ransom. i need a doctor. my brains are injured.", "you can have anything you want.", "will no one back me up? am i all alone? that would make anyone cry enough to water his garden with his tears.", "good sir"], ["i'll die , like a well-dressed bridegroom. okay, i'll be cheery. i'm king. did you know that, gentlemen?", "you're of royal blood, and we obey you.", "then there's still a chance. come and get it! but you'll have to catch me! catch me if you can! sa, sa, sa, sa.", "this is a difficult to see even in a beggar. in a king, the sight is unbearable. he has a daughter good enough to cancel out the wickedness of the other two.", "hello, good sir.", "how do you do, sir. how can i help you?", "have you heard any news of impending battle?", "certainly. everyone who can hear has heard about it.", "could you tell me how near the enemy is?", "very near, and approaching fast. the main body of the army is expected here any hour now.", "thank you, sir. that's all i wanted to know."], ["the queen is here on special business, and her army has moved on.", "thank you, sir.", "gentle gods in heaven, please let me die. don't tempt me to suicide again.", "pray well, father.", "and who are you, good sir?", "i'm a poor man who's been humbled by many misfortunes. i've had enough sorrow in my life to feel compassion for others. give me your hand. i'll lead you to some shelter.", "thank you very much. may heaven bless you.", "what good luck! i'll get the promised reward. that blind head of yours was created to make me rich. you old traitor, repent all your sins. prepare to die.", "death is exactly what i want. i hope you're strong enough to do it."], ["whoa, man, you dare to support someone who's been proclaimed a traitor? get out of here, before his bad luck infects you too. let go of his arm.", "oh no, sir, i won't let him go, sir, not without a good reason.", "let go of him, peasant, or you die!", "get on with your business, sir, and leave the poor people alone. if like yours could kill me, i'd have died weeks ago. no, don't come near the old man. keep away, i'm warning you, or i'll find out whether your head is harder than my walking stick. i'm completely serious.", "get out of here, you pile of crap.", "i'll knock your teeth out, sir. to hell with your sword.", "you peasant, you've killed me! villain, take my money. if you survive, make sure i have a decent burial. give the letters i'm carrying to edmund, earl of gloucester. he's with the english camp. oh, early death!", "i know you well. you're a hardworking villain who'd do anything his evil mistress wanted him to.", "is he dead?"], ["sit down and rest, father. let's look in his pockets. the letters he spoke of may help me. he's dead. i'm just sorry i had to be the one to kill him. let's see here. oswald come on, envelope, open up for me. i know it's bad manners, but we kill our enemies to know their secrets. reading their mail isn't as bad. \"don't forget the vows we made to each other. you have many chances to kill albany. if you have the strength of will to do it, you'll have many opportunities. if he returns in triumph, then all is lost. i'll be his prisoner, and his bed will be my prison. help me escape him, and you can take his place. your i wish i could say \"wife\" loving servant, who is ready to love you, goneril.\" is there no limit to women's lust? she's plotting against the life of her virtuous husband, and wants my brother to replace him! oswald i'll bury you here in a shallow grave, you messenger for lustful criminals. in due time i'll show this ugly letter to the duke whose life's at risk. it's a good thing for him that i can tell him about your death and the letter you were carrying.", "the king is insane. i hate the fact that i'm sane enough to be aware of my own great suffering. it'd be better to be delirious and unaware of anything. then my mind would be free of sorrow, and sadness would be forgotten in my hallucinations."], ["give me your hand. i think i hear the drums far away. come, father, i'll leave you at a friend's house."], ["oh, kent, what could i ever do to become as good as you are? i won't live long enough, and all my efforts will fail me.", "just being thanked is more than enough for me, madam. i hope all reports about me simply tell the truth, no more or less.", "change into better clothes. these rags will just remind us of those bad times when you had to wear a disguise. please take them off.", "i'm sorry, madam, but i can't do that yet. if people recognize me now, i won't be able to carry out my plans. i have to ask you, as a favor, not to let on that you recognize me until the time is right.", "all right, my lord. how's the king doing?", "he's still sleeping, ma'am.", "kind gods, heal the wounds that he's wrongly suffered! restore the sanity of this father whose children have driven him mad and changed him into a child again!", "would you mind if we woke up the king? he's slept a long time."], ["do whatever you think best. is he in his royal garments?", "yes, ma'am. we changed his clothes while he was fast asleep.", "stay close by when we wake him up, ma'am. i'm sure he will stay under control.", "all right.", "please come closer. make the music louder, please!", "lear oh, my dear father, please get better. may my kiss heal the wounds inflicted on you by my sisters who should have respected and cherished you.", "kind and dear princess!", "if you hadn't been their father, your white hair would have inspired in them only compassion. is this a face that should have endured the freezing winds or withstood the dreadful thunder or the terrible lightning? to stay awake all night like a guardsman poor lost soul! with only your thinning hair for a helmet? i would've let even my enemy's nastiest dog stay inside by the fireplace on that night, even if he had bit me. and were you then happy to find shelter on a bed of hay along with swine and homeless bums? oh, oh! it's a wonder you didn't lose your life and your mind all at once. he's waking up. talk to him."], ["you talk to him, ma'am. that's most appropriate.", "how are you, my royal lord? how is your majesty doing?", "you do me wrong by taking me out of the grave. you're a soul in heaven, but i'm tied to the fiery wheel of a torture machine in hell. even my tears burn me like molten lead.", "sir, do you know who i am?", "you're a spirit, i know. where did you die?", "doctor he's still in outer space.", "he's still half asleep. let him be for a bit.", "where have i been? where am i? is it daytime? i've been tricked. i would die of pity to see someone else in my condition. i don't know what to say. i can't even be sure these are my hands. let's see. i feel this pinprick. i wish i knew what is happening.", "look at me, sir, and give me your blessing. no, sir, don't kneel.", "please don't make fun of me. i'm a foolish, senile old man, eighty-something years old, not an hour more or less. to put it plainly, i'm afraid i'm not quite sane. i feel i should recognize you and that man kent ,"], ["but i'm not sure. i don't know where i am. i don't remember these clothes. i can't recall where i slept last night. don't laugh at me, but i swear i think this lady is my child cordelia.", "and i am, i am.", "are your tears wet? yes, indeed they are. please don't cry. if you have poison for me, i'll drink it. i know you don't love me. if i remember, your sisters did me wrong for no reason. but you didn't, even though you had every reason.", "i had no reason, no reason.", "am i in france?", "you're in your own kingdom, sir.", "don't deceive me.", "you can relax, ma'am. his insane period is over. but it's dangerous to make him try to make sense of the time he lost. ask him to go in. don't trouble him further until his mind is more settled.", "would your highness like to take a walk?", "you'll have to bear with me. please forgive and forget. i'm old and foolish."], ["is it true, sir, that the duke of cornwall was killed as they say?", "yes, it's true, sir.", "who is leading his men?", "they say gloucester's bastard son is.", "i hear that edgar, gloucester's exiled son, is with the earl of kent in germany.", "you can't trust all the rumors. it's time to reassess the situation. the british troops are coming near.", "it will likely be a bloody fight. goodbye, sir.", "my life and my plans completely depend on how today's battle ends."], ["go find out from the duke of albany if his decision still holds, or if he's changed his mind. he's always going back and forth and second-guessing himself. come back and tell me what his final decision is.", "my sister's servant oswald has certainly run into trouble.", "i'm afraid that may be the case, madam.", "now, my sweet lord, you know how much i like you. tell me truthfully, do you love my sister?", "yes, truly and honorably.", "but have you ever gone in my brother-in-law's bed and had sex with her?", "no. you dishonor yourself and our relationship by thinking that.", "i'm just worried that you've been cozying up to her, and gotten intimate with her.", "no, i swear on my honor, i haven't, madam."], ["i can't stand her. please, my lord, don't be friendly with her.", "don't worry about me. your sister and the duke are here.", "i'd rather lose this battle than allow that sister of mine to come between me and edmund.", "my dear and loving sister-in-law, i'm happy to see you. edmund sir, i've heard that the king has joined up with his daughter as well as others who have complained about our strict policies. i've never fought for a cause i didn't believe in. i'm concerned about the french because they have invaded our soil, not because they support king lear or those others who, i'm afraid, may have legitimate grievances against us.", "noble words, sir.", "why are we talking about this?", "we must join forces against the enemy. our domestic squabbles are not the issue here.", "then let's meet with our senior command and discuss what to do next.", "i'll meet you at your tent.", "goneril, are you coming with us?"], ["no.", "it's the best thing to do. please come with me.", "oh ho, i know her little tricks. okay, i'll go.", "albany if you can stoop to speak to a man as poor as i am, then listen to me, please.", "edmund regan goneril i'll catch up with you.", "go ahead.", "albany before you go into battle, open this letter. if you win, then blow your trumpet as a signal for me. i may look wretched, but i'll bravely stand up to defend my claims. if you die in battle, all your projects and this plan are off. good luck to you.", "wait until i read the letter.", "i was ordered not to. when the time comes, tell the herald to blow the trumpet and i'll return.", "goodbye, then. i'll take a look at your letter."], ["the enemy's in sight. prepare your troops. albany the reconnaissance operation has returned this estimate of the enemy's manpower and weaponry. but now, please hurry.", "we'll be ready when the time comes.", "i've sworn my love to both of these sisters. they're jealous of each other like poisonous snakes. which one of them should i pick? both? one? neither? i can't enjoy either of them as long as the other one's alive. goneril would go crazy if i chose regan, but it would be hard to get in with goneril while her husband's still alive. i'll use albany's power and authority for now to win the war, but afterward one of the sisters whichever one wants to can get rid of him. albany wants to spare lear and cordelia, but once they are my prisoners after the battle, they won't stay alive long enough to see his pardon. i have to defend my position with actions, not words."], ["here, father, rest awhile in the shade of this tree. say a little prayer for our side in battle. if i ever come back, i'll bring you good news.", "good luck, sir.", "we have to get out of here, old man. let me help you up. let's go! king lear's been defeated. he and his daughter are captured. give me your hand. come on.", "i can't go any further, sir. this is as good a place as any to die.", "are you depressed again? you can't choose your time of death any more than your time of birth. we live and die when our time comes. come on.", "and that's true too."], ["officers, take them away. guard them carefully until we decide how to punish them.", "lear at least we're not the first ones in our position. the road to hell is paved with good intentions. but i'm worried about you, my poor king. if it were only me, i would just wait out my bad luck. should we meet with my sisters?", "no, no, no, no! come on, let's go to prison. the two of us together will sing like birds in a cage. we will be good to each other. when you ask for my blessing, i'll get down on my knees and ask you to forgive me. that's how we'll live we'll pray, we'll sing, we'll tell old stories, we'll laugh at pretentious courtiers, we'll listen to nasty court gossip, we'll find out who's losing and who's winning, who's in and who's out. we'll think about the mysteries of the universe as if we were god's spies. in prison we'll outlast hordes of rulers that will come and go as their fortunes change.", "take them away.", "my cordelia, even the gods admire how much you've sacrificed for me. have i hugged you yet? anyone who wants to separate us will have to smoke us out of the cave of our togetherness like foxes. wipe your eyes."], ["our jailers will shrivel up with old age before they make us cry again. we'll watch them starve to death first. come on.", "come here, captain. listen. first captain take this note. follow those two to prison and follow these instructions. i've already promoted you once. if you do as you're told, you'll be richly rewarded. just remember this: you have to go with the times, and these are the times for being tough. a soldier can't afford to be a ninny. there'll be no quibbling about this assignment. either you accept it, or go find some other way to support yourself.", "i'll do it, sir.", "then off you go. when you've finished, you'll be a happy man. go immediately, and do exactly as i wrote down.", "jobs are hard to come by. i can't pull a cart or eat dried oats like a horse. if it's work for a man, i'll do it.", "edmund sir, you've shown your true courage today, and luck was on your side. you've taken prisoner the leaders of the opposition. i need to take cus-"], ["tody of them so i can do what's best out of concern for their honor and the safety of the kingdom.", "sir, i decided it was appropriate to send the pathetic old king to a guarded prison cell. his old age and his title make him so popular among the commoners that i was worried our enlisted soldiers would turn against us on his behalf. i sent the french queen with him too, for the same reason. they're ready to meet with you tomorrow, or whenever you like, wherever you'd like to hold your hearing. these are difficult times. many have lost friends in battle, and soldiers will curse even a justified war if it causes them pain. we need a more appropriate place to discuss cordelia and her father.", "i'm sorry, sir, but in this war i consider you a subordinate, not my equal.", "that's for to me to decide. you might have asked my opinion before saying something so rude. edmund has led our forces well, and implemented my wishes and his close connection with me gives him the right to be considered your equal.", "not so fast. he has distinguished himself as a great soldier in his own right, deserving more than any honor your can bestow on him.", "i'm the one who gave him his military commission, and it is as my proxy that he fought bravely."], ["he'd really be your proxy if he married you.", "don't joke, it might come true.", "whoa, whoa! you're so infatuated with him that you're hallucinating.", "hey, lady, if i weren't feeling a little sick, i'd give you a piece of my mind. edmund general, take my soldiers, my prisoners, my whole inheritance, and do as you like with them. i surrender myself to your good judgment. let the whole world see that i hereby make you my lord and master.", "are you trying to sleep with him?", "goneril it's not up to you to say \"yes\" or \"no.\"", "nor is it up to you, my lord.", "yes it is, you half-blood.", "edmund let the drums beat. prove your right to me by defeating any challenger.", "hang on a second. listen to me. edmund, you're under arrest for capital treason. along with you, your co-conspirator, this snake of a woman. goneril regan my dear sister-in-law, i veto your marriage announcement for the benefit of my wife, who is already engaged to edmund. so if you want to get married, you'll have to woo me. my wife's already spoken for."], ["what a farce!", "you've got a sword, gloucester. blow the trumpets. if nobody else comes to challenge you and prove what an abominable traitor you have been, i'll have to challenge you myself. i'll prove soon enough that you're just as wicked as i say you are.", "oh, i'm sick, sick!", "if she's not ill, i'll never trust drugs again.", "you're on. whoever calls me a traitor is a vicious liar. blow the trumpet. anyone who dares to step forward and make that accusation you or anyone else go ahead. i'll uphold my truth and my honor.", "a call a herald!", "a herald, a herald!", "edmund you're on your own now. the soldiers were all drafted in my name, and now they are discharged in my name.", "i feel sicker and sicker.", "she's not feeling well. take her to my tent."], ["come here, herald. let the trumpet sound! read this out. herald", "blow the trumpet!", "\"if any noble man in the army asserts that edmund, so-called earl of gloucester, is a traitor many times over, let him step forward by the third trumpet blast.\"", "sound!", "again!", "again!", "herald ask him why he's stepping forward.", "who are you? what's your name and rank, and why are you stepping forward?"], ["i've lost my name and title to a traitor. but i'm as noble as my opponent.", "and who is that?", "who's the spokesman for edmund, earl of gloucester?", "i'm my own spokesman. what do you have to say to me?", "draw your sword. if i offend you by what i say, you can use your sword to take revenge. here's mine. look at it. it's the symbol of my honor, my rank, and my status as a knight. in spite of your youth, rank, strength, and excellence at warfare, in spite of your courage, your recent victory, and your good luck, i declare that you're a traitor. you've betrayed your gods, your brother, and your father. you've plotted against this noble duke. you're a rotten traitor, through and through, from the top of your head to the soles of your feet. if you disagree with me, i'm ready to use this sword and my courage to prove that you're a liar.", "normally i would ask you what your name is first. but since you look so fine and noble, and since you're so well mannered in your speech, i'm prepared to overlook the rules of knighthood, which say i should refuse to fight a man i don't know. i throw your accusations back in your face. your lies can hardly hurt me, but i'll"], ["still fight you and embed your lies back in your hellish heart. trumpets, blow!", "edgar save him, save him!", "you were tricked into fighting, gloucester. according to the laws of war, you didn't have to fight a stranger. you haven't lost this fight; you've been tricked and deceived.", "shut your mouth, woman, or i'll shove this paper in it. stop, sir. edmund you despicable criminal, read your crime. goneril don't try to tear it up, madam. i take it you know what this letter says.", "and what if i do? i make the laws, not you. who can prosecute me for it?", "oh, monstrous! edmund do you know what letter this is?", "don't ask me what i know.", "follow her. she's desperate. make sure she doesn't do anything stupid."], ["i've done everything you accuse me of and more, much more. you'll find out everything in due time. it's all over now, and so am i. edgar but who are you, you who've managed to defeat me? if you're a nobleman, i forgive you.", "let's forgive each other. i'm no less noble than you are, edmund. if i'm more noble than you, you've done me wrong. my name is edgar, and i'm your father's son. the gods are fair, and they use our little vices to punish us. the woman he committed adultery with, your mother, cost him his eyes.", "you're right. that's true. it's all come full circle, and here i am.", "i suspected that you were noble when i saw how you walked. let me embrace you. i swear i never hated you or your father!", "i know, prince.", "where have you been hiding? how did you know what happened to your poor father?", "i knew because i helped nurse him through his suffering. listen to my little story, and when it's done, oh, my heart will break! to escape the decree condemning me"], ["to death, i disguised myself as a madman beggar and became a creature despised even by dogs. oh, how sweet our lives must be if we prefer to die gradually by debasing ourselves rather than dying all at once! in that disguise i met up with my father with bloody sockets where his beautiful eyes used to be. i became his guide, i led him and begged for him, and kept him from suicide. i never oh, what a mistake! revealed myself to him until half an hour ago, when i was in my armor. with hope in my heart i asked him for his blessing, not sure that he'd give it to me. he did. i told him everything that had happened on my journey. but his frail heart, too weak to grapple with such a conflict between joy and sadness, gave out.", "your words have moved me, and maybe it'll do some good. but go on. you look like you have something more to say.", "if there's anything more sorrowful left to add, keep it to yourself. i'm almost ready to break down hearing this much.", "this may have seemed like the pinnacle of sadness, but if i went on i could outdo it. while i was sobbing loudly, a man came in. he had seen me in my ragged clothes and shunned me, but when he found out who i was, he clasped my neck with his strong arms and cried to high heaven. he threw himself on my father and told the saddest story you've ever heard about lear and him. as he was telling that story he grieved more and"], ["more, until his heart started to break. then i heard the trumpets blow twice, and left him there in a trance.", "but who was that man?", "it was kent, sir, the exiled kent, who, after the king treated him like an enemy of the state, put on a disguise and followed his king, carrying out tasks unworthy of even a slave.", "help, help, oh, help!", "what kind of help do you need?", "say something, man!", "what is that bloody knife?", "it's still warm from the cut. it was just removed from from the heart of oh, she's dead!", "who's dead? speak, man.", "your wife, sir, your wife. and her sister's dead too, poisoned by your wife. she confessed.", "i was engaged to both of them. all three of us will marry now in death.", "here comes kent."], ["second knight bring the bodies here, whether they're alive or dead. we tremble at the gods' wrath, but we don't mourn these deaths.", "oh, is that kent? there's no time for polite greetings.", "i've come to say farewell to my king and master. isn't he here?", "what an enormous thing for us to forget! edmund, tell us, where's the king? and where's cordelia?", "do you see this, kent?", "oh, why is this so?", "still, edmund was beloved. one of the sisters poisoned the other out of love for me, and then killed herself.", "apparently so. cover their faces.", "i wish i could live longer. i want to do a little good despite my evil nature. go quickly hurry to the castle, for i've given orders to have lear and cordelia killed. hurry, send someone immediately!"], ["run, run, oh, run!", "whom should we look for in the castle? whose job is it? send something along to prove you're withdrawing the orders.", "good idea. take my sword. the captain give it to the captain.", "run as if your life depended on it.", "my wife and i ordered him to hang cordelia in prison and then to make it look as if she committed suicide in despair.", "heaven help her! get him out of here for now.", "howl, howl, howl, howl! oh, you men are made of stone! if i were you with eyes and a tongue to speak with, i'd crack heaven wide open with my laments! she's gone forever. i know how to tell when someone is alive or dead. she's as dead as the cold ground. let me borrow a mirror. if her breath steams up the glass, then she's alive.", "is this doomsday? the end of the world?", "or just a foretaste of it?"], ["let the world collapse around us.", "this feather moved because of her breath. she's alive. if that's true, it makes up for all the sorrows i've ever known.", "oh, my good master!", "please, go away.", "it's noble kent, your friend.", "curse you all, you're all murderers and traitors! i could have saved her. now she's gone forever. cordelia, cordelia, stay a while. ha? what are you saying? her voice always was so soft and gentle. that's a good thing in a woman. i killed the scum who was hanging you.", "it's true, my lords, he did.", "didn't i? back in the old days i would've made him dance with my sword. but i'm old now, and suffering has weakened me. kent who are you? my eyesight's not the best, i'll tell you straight.", "we're looking at the unluckiest man who ever lived.", "my vision is dull. aren't you kent?", "that's me. your servant kent. where's your servant ?"], ["he's a good fellow, i can tell you that much. not afraid to fight, he's a feisty one. he's dead and rotting in the dirt now.", "no, my lord, that was me. i'm the one who", "i'll get right on that.", "followed you on your sad wanderings, ever since your bad luck began.", "nice to see you.", "it was me, no one else. everything is gloomy, dark, and dreadful. your eldest daughters destroyed themselves and died in despair.", "yes, i think that's true.", "he doesn't know what he's saying. it's useless to try to talk to him.", "yes, it's pointless.", "edmund is dead, my lord.", "that doesn't matter much with everything else that's going on. gentlemen, i will announce my plans. i'll do everything i can to ease the king's suffering. as for me, i'm surrendering all my power over to him, giving him absolute authority for the rest of his life."], ["edgar kent you will get back your rightful property and titles, along with new honors that you have more than deserved. my friends and allies will be rewarded for their support, and my enemies will get what they deserve. look, look!", "and my poor was hanged. no, no, no life left? why should a dog or horse or rat have life, but not you? you'll never come to me again, never, never, never, never, never. please help me undo this button. thank you, sir. do you see that? look at her. look, her lips. look there, look there. oh, oh, oh, oh.", "he's fainted. my lord, my lord!", "my heart will break, break.", "lear look at me, my lord.", "don't disturb his soul. let it go up to heaven. his soul would be angry at anyone who tried to keep him in the torture chamber of this life any longer.", "oh, he's really gone.", "what's amazing is how long he lasted. he was living on borrowed time at the end.", "carry them away. our business now is mourning and grief. kent edgar my friends and soulmates, you two will reign over this kingdom and keep the wounded country alive."], ["i will have to go on a journey to death soon, sir. my master's calling me. i can't say no.", "we must remember the gravity of this sad day. we should speak what we feel, not what we ought to say. the oldest one suffered the most. we young ones will never see as much as he has seen, or live as long."]], [["when should the three of us meet again? will it be in thunder, lightning, or rain?", "we'll meet when the noise of the battle is over, when one side has won and the other side has lost.", "that will happen before sunset.", "where should we meet?", "let's do it in the open field.", "we'll meet macbeth there.", "i'm coming, graymalkin!", "my toad, paddock, calls me.", "i'll be right here!", "fair is foul, and foul is fair. let's fly away through the fog and filthy air."], ["who is this bloody man? judging from his appearance, i bet he can tell us the latest news about the revolt.", "this is the brave sergeant who fought to keep me from being captured. hail, brave friend! tell the king what was happening in the battle when you left it.", "for a while you couldn't tell who would win. the armies were like two exhausted swimmers clinging to each other and struggling in the water, unable to move. the villainous rebel macdonwald was supported by foot soldiers and horsemen from ireland and the hebrides, and lady luck was with him, smiling cruelly at his enemies as if she were his whore. but luck and macdonwald together weren't strong enough. brave macbeth, laughing at luck, chopped his way through to macdonwald, who didn't even have time to say good-bye or shake hands before macbeth split him open from his navel to his jawbone and stuck his head on our castle walls.", "my brave relative! what a worthy man!"], ["but in the same way that violent storms always come just as spring appears, our success against macdonwald created new problems for us. listen to this, king: as soon as we sent those irish soldiers running for cover, the norwegian king saw his chance to attack us with fresh troops and shiny weapons.", "didn't this frighten our captains, macbeth and banquo?", "the new challenge scared them about as much as sparrows frighten eagles, or rabbits frighten a lion. to tell you the truth, they fought the new enemy with twice as much force as before; they were like cannons loaded with double ammunition. maybe they wanted to take a bath in their enemies' blood, or make that battlefield as infamous as golgotha, where christ was crucified, i don't know. but i feel weak. my wounds must be tended to.", "your words, like your wounds, bring you honor. take him to the surgeons.", "who is this?", "the worthy of ross.", "his eyes seem frantic! he looks like someone with a strange tale to tell."], ["god save the king!", "where have you come from, worthy thane?", "great king, i've come from fife, where the norwegian flag flies, mocking our country and frightening our people. leading an enormous army and assisted by that disloyal traitor, the thane of cawdor, the king of norway began a bloody battle. but outfitted in his battle-weathered armor, macbeth met the norwegian attacks shot for shot, as if he were the goddess of war's husband. finally he broke the enemy's spirit, and we were victorious.", "great happiness!", "so now sweno, the norwegian king, wants a treaty. we told him we wouldn't even let him bury his men until he retreated to saint colme's inch and paid us ten thousand dollars.", "the thane of cawdor will never again betray me. go announce that he will be executed, and tell macbeth that cawdor's titles will be given to him.", "i'll get it done right away.", "the thane of cawdor has lost what the noble macbeth has won."], ["where have you been, sister?", "killing pigs.", "and you, sister?", "a sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap and munched away at them. \"give me one,\" i said. \"get away from me, witch!\" the fat woman cried. her husband has sailed off to aleppo as master of a ship called the . i'll sail there in a kitchen strainer, turn myself into a tailless rat, and do things to him", "i'll give you some wind to sail there.", "how nice of you!", "and i will give you some more.", "i already have control of all the other winds, along with the ports from which they blow and every direction on the sailor's compass in which they can go. i'll drain the life out of him. he won't catch a wink of sleep, either at night or during the day. he will live as a cursed man. for eighty-one weeks he will waste away in agony."], ["although i can't make his ship disappear, i can still make his journey miserable. look what i have here.", "show me, show me.", "here i have the thumb of a pilot who was drowned while trying to return home.", "a drum, a drum! macbeth has come.", "we weird sisters, hand in hand, swift travelers over the sea and land, dance around and around like so. three times to yours, and three times to mine, and three times again, to add up to nine. enough! the charm is ready.", "banquo i have never seen a day that was so good and bad at the same time.", "how far is it supposed to be to forres? witches what are these creatures? they're so withered-looking and crazily dressed. they don't look like they belong on this planet, but i see them standing here on earth. witches are you alive? can you answer questions? you seem to understand me, because each of you has put a gruesome finger to her skinny lips. you look like women, but your beards keep me from believing that you really are."], ["speak, if you can. what kind of creatures are you?", "all hail, macbeth! hail to you, thane of glamis!", "all hail, macbeth! hail to you, thane of cawdor!", "all hail, macbeth, the future king!", "my dear macbeth, why do you look so startled and afraid of these nice things they're saying? witches tell me honestly, are you illusions, or are you really what you seem to be? you've greeted my noble friend with honors and talk of a future so glorious that you've made him speechless. but you don't say anything to me. if you can see the future and say how things will turn out, tell me. i don't want your favors and i'm not afraid of your hatred.", "hail!", "hail!", "hail!", "you are lesser than macbeth but also greater.", "you are not as happy as macbeth, yet much happier.", "your descendants will be kings, even though you will not be one. so all hail, macbeth and banquo!"], ["banquo and macbeth, all hail!", "wait! you only told me part of what i want to know. stay and tell me more. i already know i am the thane of glamis because i inherited the position when my father, sinel, died. but how can you call me the thane of cawdor? the thane of cawdor is alive, and he's a rich and powerful man. and for me to be the king is completely impossible, just as it's impossible for me to be thane of cawdor. tell me where you learned these strange things, and why you stop us at this desolate place with this prophetic greeting? speak, i command you.", "the earth has bubbles, just like the water, and these creatures must have come from a bubble in the earth. where did they disappear to?", "into thin air. their bodies melted like breath in the wind. i wish they had stayed!", "were these things we're talking about really here? or are we both on drugs?", "your children will be kings.", "you will be the king.", "and thane of cawdor too. isn't that what they said?", "that's exactly what they said. who's this?"], ["the king was happy to hear of your success, macbeth. whenever he hears the story of your exploits in the fight against the rebels, he becomes so amazed it makes him speechless. he was also shocked to learn that on the same day you fought the rebels you also fought against the army of norway, and that you weren't the least bit afraid of death, even as you killed everyone around you. messenger after messenger delivered news of your bravery to the king with praise for how you defended his country.", "the king sent us to give you his thanks and to bring you to him. your real reward won't come from us.", "and to give you a taste of what's in store for you, he told me to call you the thane of cawdor. so hail, thane of cawdor! that title belongs to you now.", "can the devil tell the truth?", "the thane of cawdor is still alive. why are you giving me his title?", "the man who was the thane of cawdor is still alive, but he's been sentenced to death, and he deserves to die. i don't know whether he fought on norway's side, or if he secretly aided the rebels, or if he fought with both of our enemies. but his treason, which has been proven, and to which he's confessed, means he's finished."], ["it's just like they said now i'm the thane of glamis and the thane of cawdor. and the best part of what they predicted is still to come. ross angus thank you for the news. banquo aren't you beginning to hope your children will be kings? after all, the witches who said i was thane of cawdor promised them nothing less.", "if you trust what they say, you might be on your way to becoming king, as well as thane of cawdor. but this whole thing is strange. the agents of evil often tell us part of the truth in order to lead us to our destruction. they earn our trust by telling us the truth about little things, but then they betray us when it will damage us the most. ross angus gentlemen, i'd like to have a word with you, please.", "so far the witches have told me two things that came true, so it seems like this will culminate in my becoming king. ross angus thank you, gentlemen. this supernatural temptation doesn't seem like it can be a bad thing, but it can't be good either. if it's a bad thing, why was i promised a promotion that turned out to be true? now i'm the thane of cawdor, just like they said i would be. but if this is a good thing, why do i find myself thinking about murdering king duncan, a thought so horrifying that it makes my hair stand on end and my heart pound inside my chest? the dangers that actually threaten me here and now frighten me less than the horrible things i'm imagining."], ["even though it's just a fantasy so far, the mere thought of committing murder shakes me up so much that i hardly know who i am anymore. my ability to act is stifled by my thoughts and speculations, and the only things that matter to me are things that don't really exist.", "look at macbeth he's in a daze.", "if fate wants me to be king, perhaps fate will just make it happen and i won't have to do anything.", "ross angus macbeth is not used to his new titles. they're like new clothes: they don't fit until you break them in over time.", "one way or another, what's going to happen is going to happen.", "good macbeth, we're ready when you are.", "i beg your pardon; i was distracted. kind gentlemen, i won't forget the trouble you've taken for me whenever i think of this day. let's go to the king. banquo think about what happened today, and when we've both had time to consider things, let's talk.", "absolutely.", "until then, we've said enough. ross angus let's go, my friends."], ["has the former thane of cawdor been executed yet? haven't the people in charge of that come back?", "my king, they haven't come back yet. but i spoke with someone who saw cawdor die, and he said that cawdor openly confessed his treasons, begged your highness's forgiveness, and repented deeply. he never did anything in his whole life that looked as good as the way he died. he died like someone who had practiced how to toss away his most cherished possession as if it were a worthless a piece of garbage.", "there's no way to read a man's mind by looking at his face. i trusted cawdor completely.", "macbeth my worthiest kinsman! just this moment i was feeling guilty for not having thanked you enough. you have done so much for me so fast that it has been impossible to reward you properly. if you deserved less, then perhaps my payment would have matched your deeds! all i can say is that i owe you more than i can ever repay."], ["the opportunity to serve you is its own reward. your only duty, your highness, is to accept what we owe you. our duty to you and your state is like the duty of children to their father or servants to their master. by doing everything we can to protect you, we're only doing what we should.", "you are welcome here. by making you thane of cawdor, i have planted the seeds of a great career for you, and i will make sure they grow. banquo noble banquo, you deserve no less than macbeth, and everyone should know it. let me bring you close to me and give you the benefit of my love and good will.", "then if i accomplish anything great, it will be a credit to you.", "my joy is so overwhelming it brings tears to my eyes. my sons, relatives, lords, and all those closest to me, i want you to witness that i will bestow my kingdom on my eldest son, malcolm. today i name him the prince of cumberland. but malcolm isn't going to be alone in receiving honors titles of nobility will shine like stars on all of you who deserve them. macbeth and now, let's go to your castle at inverness, where i will become even more obliged to you because of your hospitality.", "i'm not happy unless i can be working for you. i will go ahead and bring my wife the good news that you are coming. with that, i'll be off.", "my worthy cawdor!"], ["malcolm is now the prince of cumberland! to become king myself, i'm either going to have to step over him or give up, because he's in my way. stars, hide your light so no one can see the terrible desires within me. i won't let my eye look at what my hand is doing, but in the end i'm still going to do that thing i'd be horrified to see.", "banquo you're right, banquo. macbeth is every bit as valiant as you say, and i am satisfied with these praises of him. let's follow after him, now that he has gone ahead to prepare our welcome. he is a man without equal."], ["\"the witches met me on the day of my victory in battle, and i have since learned that they have supernatural knowledge. when i tried desperately to question them further, they vanished into thin air. while i stood spellbound, messengers from the king arrived and greeted me as the thane of cawdor, which is precisely how the weird sisters had saluted me before calling me 'the future king!' i thought i should tell you this news, my dearest partner in greatness, so that you could rejoice along with me about the greatness that is promised to us. keep it secret, and farewell.\"", "you are thane of glamis and cawdor, and you're going to be king, just like you were promised. but i worry about whether or not you have what it takes to seize the crown. you are too full of the milk of human kindness to strike aggressively at your first opportunity. you want to be powerful, and you don't lack ambition, but you don't have the mean streak that these things call for. the things you want to do, you want to do like a good man. you don't want to cheat, yet you want what doesn't belong to you. there's something you want, but you're afraid to do what you need to do to get it. you want it to be done for you. hurry home so i can persuade you and talk you out of whatever's keeping you from going after the crown. after all, fate and witchcraft both seem to want you to be king."], ["what news do you bring?", "the king is coming here tonight.", "you must be crazy to say that! isn't macbeth with the king, and wouldn't macbeth have told me in advance so i could prepare, if the king were really coming?", "i'm sorry, but it's the truth. macbeth is coming. he sent a messenger ahead of him who arrived here so out of breath that he could barely speak his message.", "take good care of him. he brings great news.", "so the messenger is short of breath, like a hoarse raven, as he announces duncan's entrance into my fortress, where he will die. come, you spirits that asist murderous thoughts, make me less like a woman and more like a man, and fill me from head to toe with deadly cruelty! thicken my blood and clog up my veins so i won't feel remorse, so that no human compassion can stop my evil plan or prevent me from accomplishing it! come to my female breast and turn my mother's milk into poisonous acid, you murdering demons, wherever you hide, invisible and waiting to do evil! come, thick night, and cover the world in the darkest smoke of hell, so that my sharp knife can't see the wound it cuts open, and so heaven can't peep through the darkness and cry, \"no! stop!\""], ["great thane of glamis! worthy thane of cawdor! you'll soon be greater than both those titles, once you become king! your letter has transported me from the present moment, when who knows what will happen, and has made me feel like the future is already here.", "my dearest love, duncan is coming here tonight.", "and when is he leaving?", "he plans to leave tomorrow.", "that day will never come. your face betrays strange feelings, my lord, and people will be able to read it like a book. in order to deceive them, you must appear the way they expect you to look. greet the king with a welcoming expression in your eyes, your hands, and your words. you should look like an innocent flower, but be like the snake that hides underneath the flower. the king is coming, and he's got to be taken care of. let me handle tonight's preparations, because tonight will change every night and day for the rest of our lives.", "we will speak about this further.", "you should project a peaceful mood, because if you look troubled, you will arouse suspicion. leave all the rest to me."], ["this castle is in a pleasant place. the air is sweet and appeals to my refined senses.", "the fact that this summer bird, the house martin, builds his nests here proves how inviting the breezes are. there isn't a single protrusion in the castle walls where these birds haven't built their hanging nests to sleep and breed. i've noticed that they always like to settle and mate where the air is the nicest.", "look, here comes our honored hostess! sometimes the love my subjects bring me is inconvenient, but i still accept it as love. in doing so, i'm teaching you to thank me for the incovenience i'm causing you by being here, because it comes from my love to you.", "everything we're doing for you, even if it were doubled and then doubled again, is nothing compared to the honors you have brought to our family. we gladly welcome you as our guests, with gratitude for both the honors you've given us before and the new honors you've just given us."], ["where is macbeth, the thane of cawdor? we followed closely after him. i hoped to arrive here before him, but he rides swiftly. and his great love, which is as sharp as his spur, helped him beat us here. fair and noble hostess, we are your guests tonight.", "we are your servants, your highness, and as always our house and everything in it is at your disposal, for after all, we keep it in your trust and we're glad to give you back what's yours.", "give me your hand. bring me to my host, macbeth. i love him dearly, and i shall continue to favor him. whenever you're ready, hostess."], ["if this business would really be finished when i did the deed, then it would be best to get it over with quickly. if the assassination of the king could work like a net, sweeping up everything and preventing any consequences, then the murder would be the be-all and end-all of the whole affair, and i would gladly put my soul and the afterlife at risk to do it. but for crimes like these there are still punishments in this world. by committing violent crimes we only teach other people to commit violence, and the violence of our students will come back to plague us teachers. justice, being equal to everyone, forces us to drink from the poisoned cup that we serve to others. the king trusts me in two ways. first of all, i am his kinsman and his subject, so i should always try to protect him. second, i am his host, so i should be closing the door in his murderer's face, not trying to murder him myself. besides, duncan has been such a humble leader, so free of corruption, that his virtuous legacy will speak for him when he dies, as if angels were playing trumpets against the injustice of his murder. pity, like an innocent newborn baby, will ride the wind with winged angels on invisible horses through the air to spread news of the horrible deed to everyone everywhere. people will shed a flood of tears that will drown the wind like a horrible downpour of rain. i can't spur myself to action. the only thing motivating me is ambition, which makes people rush ahead of themselves toward disaster."], ["what news do you have?", "he has almost finished dinner. why did you leave the dining room?", "has he asked for me?", "don't you know he has?", "we can't go on with this plan. the king has just honored me, and i have earned the good opinion of all sorts of people. i want to enjoy these honors while the feeling is fresh and not throw them away so soon.", "were you drunk when you seemed so hopeful before? have you gone to sleep and woken up green and pale in fear of this idea? from now on this is what i'll think of your love. are you afraid to act the way you desire? will you take the crown you want so badly, or will you live as a coward, always saying \"i can't\" after you say \"i want to\"? you're like the poor cat in the old story.", "please, stop! i dare to do only what is proper for a man to do. he who dares to do more is not a man at all.", "if you weren't a man, then what kind of animal were you when you first told me you wanted to do this? when you dared to do it, that's when you were a man. and if you go one step further by doing what you dared to do before, you'll be that much more the man. the time and place weren't right before, but you would have gone ahead with the murder anyhow. now the time and place are just right, but they're almost too good for you. i have suckled a baby, and i know how sweet it is to love the baby at my breast. but even as the baby was smiling up at me, i would have plucked my nipple out of its mouth and smashed its brains out against a wall if i had sworn to do that the same way you have sworn to do this."], ["but if we fail", "we, fail? if you get your courage up, we can't fail. when duncan is asleep the day's hard journey has definitely made him tired i'll get his two servants so drunk that their memory will go up in smoke through the chimneys of their brains. when they lie asleep like pigs, so drunk they'll be dead to the world, what won't you and i be able to do to the unguarded duncan? and whatever we do, we can lay all the blame on the drunken servants.", "may you only give birth to male children, because your fearless spirit should create nothing that isn't masculine. once we have covered the two servants with blood, and used their daggers to kill, won't people believe that they were the culprits?"], ["who could think it happened any other way? we'll be grieving loudly when we hear that duncan has died.", "now i'm decided, and i will exert every muscle in my body to commit this crime. go now, and pretend to be a friendly hostess. hide with a false pleasant face what you know in your false, evil heart."], ["how's the night going, boy?", "the moon has set. the clock hasn't struck yet.", "the moon sets at twelve, right?", "i think it's later than that, sir.", "here, take my sword. the heavens are being stingy with their light. take this, too. i'm tired and feeling heavy, but i can't sleep. merciful powers, keep away the nightmares that plague me when i rest!", "give me my sword. who's there?", "a friend.", "you're not asleep yet, sir? the king's in bed. he's been in an unusually good mood and has granted many gifts to your household and servants. this diamond is a present from him to your wife for her boundless hospitality. macbeth", "because we were unprepared for the king's visit, we weren't able to entertain him as well as we would have wanted to."], ["everything's ok. i had a dream last night about the three witches. at least part of what they said about you was true.", "i don't think about them now. but when we have an hour to spare we can talk more about it, if you're willing.", "whenever you like.", "if you stick with me, when the time comes, there will be something in it for you.", "i'll do whatever you say, as long as i can do it with a clear conscience.", "rest easy in the meantime.", "thank you, sir. you do the same.", "servant go and tell your mistress to strike the bell when my drink is ready. get yourself to bed.", "is this a dagger i see in front of me, with its handle pointing toward my hand? come, let me hold you. i don't have you but i can still see you. fateful apparition, isn't it possible to touch you as well as see you? or are you nothing more than a dagger created by the mind, a hallucination from my fevered brain? i can still see you, and you look as real as this other dagger that i'm pulling out now. you're leading me toward the place i was going already, and i was planning to use a weapon just like you. my eyesight must either be the one sense that's not working, or else it's the only one that's working right. i can still see you, and i see blood splotches on your blade and handle that weren't there before. there's no dagger here. it's the murder i'm about to do that's making me think i see one. now half the world is asleep and being deceived by evil nightmares. witches are offering sacrifices to their goddess hecate. old man murder, having been roused by the howls of his wolf, walks silently to his destination, moving like , as quiet as a ghost. hard ground, don't listen to the direction of my steps. i don't want you to echo back where i am and break the terrible stillness of this moment, a silence that is so appropriate for what i'm about to do. while i stay here talking, duncan lives. the more i talk, the more my courage cools."], ["i'm going now. the murder is as good as done. the bell is telling me to do it. don't listen to the bell, duncan, because it summons you either to heaven or to hell."], ["the alcohol that got the servants drunk has made me bold. the same liquor that quenched their thirst has fired me up. listen! quiet! that was the owl that shrieked, with a scary \"good night\" like the bells they ring before they execute people. macbeth must be killing the king right now. the doors to duncan's chamber are open, and the drunk servants make a mockery of their jobs by snoring instead of protecting the king. i put so many drugs in their drinks that you can't tell if they're alive or dead.", "who's there? what is it?", "oh no, i'm afraid the servants woke up, and the murder didn't happen. for us to attempt murder and not succeed would ruin us. listen to that! i put the servants' daggers where macbeth would find them. he couldn't have missed them. if duncan hadn't reminded me of my father when i saw him sleeping, i would have killed him myself.", "my husband!", "i have done the deed. did you hear a noise?", "i heard the owl scream and the crickets cry. didn't you say something?", "when?"], ["just now.", "as i came down?", "yes.", "listen! who's sleeping in the second chamber?", "donalbain.", "this is a sorry sight.", "that's a stupid thing to say.", "one of the servants laughed in his sleep, and one cried, \"murder!\" and they woke each other up. i stood and listened to them, but then they said their prayers and went back to sleep.", "malcolm and donalbain are asleep in the same room.", "one servant cried, \"god bless us!\" and the other replied, \"amen,\" as if they had seen my bloody hands. listening to their frightened voices, i couldn't reply \"amen\" when they said \"god bless us!\"", "don't think about it so much.", "but why couldn't i say \"amen\"? i desperately needed god's blessing, but the word \"amen\" stuck in my throat.", "we can't think that way about what we did. if we do, it'll drive us crazy."], ["i thought i heard a voice cry, \"sleep no more! macbeth is murdering sleep.\" innocent sleep. sleep that soothes away all our worries. sleep that puts each day to rest. sleep that relieves the weary laborer and heals hurt minds. sleep, the main course in life's feast, and the most nourishing.", "what are you talking about?", "the voice kept crying, \"sleep no more!\" to everyone in the house. \"macbeth has murdered sleep, and therefore macbeth will sleep no more.\"", "who said that? why, my worthy lord, you let yourself become weak when you think about things in this cowardly way. go get some water and wash this bloody evidence from your hands. why did you carry these daggers out of the room? they have to stay there. go take them back and smear the sleeping guards with the blood.", "i can't go back. i'm afraid even to think about what i've done. i can't stand to look at it again.", "coward! give me the daggers. dead and sleeping people can't hurt you any more than pictures can. only children are afraid of scary pictures. if duncan bleeds i'll paint the servants' faces with his blood. we must make it seem like they're guilty."], ["where is that knocking coming from? what's happening to me, that i'm frightened of every noise? whose hands are these? ha! they're plucking out my eyes. will all the water in the ocean wash this blood from my hands? no, instead my hands will stain the seas scarlet, turning the green waters red.", "my hands are as red as yours, but i would be ashamed if my heart were as pale and weak.", "i hear someone knocking at the south entry. let's go back to our bedroom. a little water will wash away the evidence of our guilt. it's so simple! you've lost your resolve.", "listen! there's more knocking. put on your nightgown, in case someone comes and sees that we're awake. snap out of your daze.", "rather than have to think about my crime, i'd prefer to be completely unconscious.", "wake duncan with your knocking. i wish you could!"], ["this is a lot of knocking! come to think of it, if a man were in charge of opening the gates of hell to let people in, he would have to turn the key a lot.", "knock, knock, knock! who's there, in the devil's name? maybe it's a farmer who killed himself because grain was cheap. you're here just in time! i hope you brought some handkerchiefs; you're going to sweat a lot here.", "knock, knock! who's there, in the other devil's name? maybe it's some slick, two-faced con man who lied under oath. but he found out that you can't lie to god, and now he's going to hell for perjury. come on in, con man.", "knock, knock, knock! who's there? maybe it's an english tailor who liked to skimp on the fabric for people's clothes. but now that tight pants are in fashion he can't get away with it. come on in, tailor. you can heat your iron up in here."], ["knock, knock! never a moment of peace! who are you? ah, this place is too cold to be hell. i won't pretend to be the devil's porter anymore. i was going to let someone from every profession into hell.", "i'm coming, i'm coming! please, don't forget to leave me a tip.", "did you go to bed so late, my friend, that you're having a hard time getting up now?", "that's right sir, we were drinking until 3 a.m., and drink, sir, makes a man do three things.", "what three things does drink make a man do?", "drinking turns your nose red, it puts you to sleep, and it makes you urinate. lust it turns on but also turns off. what i mean is, drinking stimulates desire but hinders performance. therefore, too much drink is like a con artist when it comes to your sex drive. it sets you up for a fall. it gets you up but it keeps you from getting off. it persuades you and discourages you. it gives you an erection but doesn't let you keep it, if you see what i'm saying. it makes you dream about erotic experiences, but then it leaves you asleep and needing to pee.", "i believe drink did all of this to you last night."], ["it did, sir. it got me right in the throat. but i got even with drink. i was too strong for it. although it weakened my legs and made me unsteady, i managed to vomit it out and laid it flat on the ground.", "is your master awake?", "our knocking woke him up. here he comes.", "good morning, noble sir.", "good morning to both of you.", "is the king awake, worthy thane?", "not yet.", "he commanded me to wake him up early. i've almost missed the time he requested.", "i'll bring you to him.", "i know the burden of hosting him is both an honor and a trouble, but that doesn't mean it's not a trouble just the same.", "the work we enjoy is not really work. this is the door.", "i'll wake him, because that's my job.", "is the king leaving here today?"], ["he is. he told us to arrange it.", "the night has been chaotic. the wind blew down through the chimneys where we were sleeping. people are saying they heard cries of grief in the air, strange screams of death, and terrible voices predicting catastrophes that will usher in a woeful new age. the owl made noise all night. some people say that the earth shook as if it had a fever.", "it was a rough night.", "i'm too young to remember anything like it.", "oh, horror, horror, horror! this is beyond words and beyond belief!", "what's the matter?", "the worst thing imaginable has happened. a murderer has broken into and stolen the life out of it.", "what are you talking about? \"the life\"?", "do you mean the king?"], ["go into the bedroom and see for yourself. what's in there will make you freeze with horror. don't ask me to talk about it. go look and then do the talking yourselves.", "wake up, wake up! ring the alarm bell. murder and treason! banquo and donalbain, malcolm! wake up! shake off sleep, which looks like death, and look at death itself! get up, get up, and look at this image of doomsday! malcolm! banquo! get up from your beds as if you were rising out of your own graves, and walk like ghosts to come witness this horror. ring the bell.", "what's going on? why is that terrifying trumpet calling together everyone who's sleeping in the house? speak up and tell me!", "oh gentle lady, my news isn't fit for your ears. if i repeated it to you, it would kill you as soon as you heard it.", "oh banquo, banquo, the king has been murdered!", "how horrible! what, in our own house?"], ["it would be a terrible event no matter where it happened. dear macduff, i beg you, tell us you were lying and say it isn't so.", "if i had only died an hour before this event i could say i had lived a blessed life. because from this moment on, there is nothing worth living for. everything is a sick joke. the graceful and renowned king is dead. the wine of life has been poured out, and only the dregs remain.", "what's wrong?", "you are, but you don't know it yet. the source from which your royal blood comes has been stopped.", "your royal father is murdered.", "who did it?", "it seems that the guards who were supposed to be protecting his chamber did it. their hands and faces were all covered with blood. so were their daggers, which we found on their pillows, unwiped. they stared at us in confusion. no one's life should have been entrusted to them.", "and yet i still regret the anger that drove me to kill them."], ["what did you do that for?", "is it possible to be wise, bewildered, calm, furious, loyal, and neutral all at once? nobody can do that. the violent rage inspired by my love for duncan caused me to act before i could think rationally and tell myself to pause. there was duncan, his white skin all splattered with his precious blood. the gashes where the knives had cut him looked like wounds to nature itself. then right next to him i saw the murderers, dripping with blood, their daggers rudely covered in gore. who could have restrained himself, who loved duncan and had the courage to act on it?", "help me out of here, quickly!", "take care of the lady.", "donalbain why are we keeping quiet? the two of us have the most to say in this matter.", "malcolm what are we going to say here, where danger may be waiting to strike at us from anywhere? let's get out of here. we haven't even begun to weep yet but there will be time for that later.", "donalbain and the time hasn't come yet for us to turn our deep grief into action.", "take care of the lady."], ["when we're properly dressed for the cold, let's meet and discuss this bloody crime to see if we can figure anything out. right now we're shaken up by fears and doubts. i'm putting myself in god's hands, and with his help i plan to fight against the secret plot that caused this treasonous murder.", "so will i.", "so will we all.", "let's get dressed quickly and then meet in the hall.", "agreed.", "what are you going to do? let's not stay here with them. it's easy for a liar to pretend to feel sorrow when he actually feels none. i'm going to england.", "i'll go to ireland. we'll both be safer if we go separate ways. wherever we go, men will smile at us while hiding daggers. our closest relatives are the ones most likely to murder us.", "we haven't yet encountered that danger, and the best thing to do is avoid it entirely. with that in mind, let's get on our horses. we'd better not worry about saying polite good-byes; we should just get away quickly. there's good reason to escape when there's no mercy to be found anymore."], ["i can remember the past seventy years pretty well, and in all that time i have seen dreadful hours and strange things. but last night's horrors make everything that came before seem like a joke.", "ah yes, old man. you can see the skies. they look like they're upset about what mankind has been doing, and they're threatening the earth with storms. the clock says it's daytime, but dark night is strangling the sun. is it because night is so strong, or because day is so weak, that darkness covers the earth when it's supposed to be light?", "it's unnatural, just like the murder that has been committed. last tuesday a falcon was circling high in the sky, and it was caught and killed by an ordinary owl that usually goes after mice.", "and something else strange happened. duncan's horses, which are beautiful and swift and the best of their breed, suddenly turned wild and broke out of their stalls. refusing to be obedient as usual, they acted like they were at war with mankind.", "they say the horses ate each other.", "i saw it with my own eyes. it was an amazing sight. here comes the good macduff."], ["how are things going now?", "can't you see for yourself?", "does anyone know who committed this horrible crime?", "the servants macbeth killed.", "it's too bad he killed them. what good would it have done those men to kill duncan?", "they were paid to betray their master. malcolm and donalbain, the king's two sons, have run away and fled, which makes them the prime suspects.", "everything about this is unnatural! what a stupid ambition, causing a son to kill the father who supports him. then it looks like macbeth will become king.", "he has already been named king and has left for scone to be crowned.", "where is duncan's body?", "it was carried to colmekill to be placed in the tomb of his ancestors, where their bones are kept safe.", "are you going to scone?", "no, cousin, i'm going to fife.", "well, i'll go to scone."], ["i hope things go well there. good-bye! and let's hope things don't get worse.", "farewell, old man.", "may god's blessing go with you and with all who turn bad into good, and enemies into friends!"], ["now you have it all: you're the king, the thane of cawdor, and the thane of glamis, just like the weird women promised you. and i suspect you cheated to win these titles. but it was also prophesied that the crown would not go to your descendants, and that my sons and grandsons would be kings instead. if the witches tell the truth which they did about you maybe what they said about me will come true too. but shhh! i'll shut up now.", "here's our most important guest.", "if we forgot him, our big celebration wouldn't be complete, and that wouldn't be any good.", "banquo tonight we're having a ceremonial banquet, and i want you to be there.", "whatever your highness commands me to do, it is always my duty to do it."], ["are you going riding this afternoon?", "yes, my good lord.", "we would have liked to have heard your good advice, which has always been serious and helpful, at the council today, but we'll wait until tomorrow. are you riding far?", "i'm going far enough that i'll be riding from now until dinner. unless my horse goes faster than expected, i will be back an hour or two after sunset.", "don't miss our feast.", "my lord, i won't miss it.", "we hear that the princes, those murderers, have hidden in england and ireland. they haven't confessed to cruelly murdering their own father, and they've been making up strange lies to tell their hosts. but we can talk more about that tomorrow, when we'll discuss matters of state that concern us both. hurry up and get to your horse. good-bye, until you return tonight. is fleance going with you?", "yes, my good lord. it's time we hit the road.", "i hope your horses are fast and surefooted. and with that, i send you to them. farewell.", "everybody may do as they please until seven o'clock tonight. in order to make your company even more enjoyable, i'm going to keep to myself until suppertime. until then, god be with you!"], ["servant you there, let me have a word with you. are those men waiting for me?", "they're waiting outside the palace gate, my lord.", "bring them to me.", "to be the king is nothing if i'm not safe as the king. i'm very afraid of banquo. there's something noble about him that makes me fear him. he's willing to take risks, and his mind never stops working. he has the wisdom to act bravely but also safely. i'm not afraid of anyone but him. around him, my guardian angel is frightened, just as mark antony's angel supposedly feared octavius caesar. banquo chided the witches when they first called me king, asking them to tell him his own future. then, like prophets, they named him the father to a line of kings. they gave me a crown and a scepter that i can't pass on. someone outside my family will take these things away from me, since no son of mine will take my place as king. if this is true, then i've tortured my conscience and murdered the gracious duncan for banquo's sons. i've ruined my own peace for their benefit. i've handed over my everlasting soul to the devil so that they could be kings. banquo's sons, kings! instead of watching that happen, i will challenge fate to battle and fight to the death. who's there!"], ["now go to the door and stay there until i call for you.", "wasn't it just yesterday that we spoke to each other?", "it was yesterday, your highness.", "well, did you think about what i said? you should know that it was banquo who made your lives hell for so long, which you always thought was my fault. but i was innocent. i showed you the proof at our last meeting. i explained how you were deceived, how you were thwarted, the things that were used against you, who was working against you, and a lot of other things that would convince even a half-wit or a crazy person to say, \"banquo did it!\"", "you explained it all.", "i did that and more, which brings me to the point of this second meeting. are you so patient and forgiving that you're going to let him off the hook? are you so pious that you would pray for this man and his children, a man who has pushed you toward an early grave and put your family in poverty forever?", "we are men, my lord.", "yes, you're part of the species called men. just as hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, mutts, shaggy lapdogs, swimming dogs, and wolf-dog crossbreeds are all dogs. but if you list the different kinds of dogs according to their qualities, you can distinguish which breeds are fast or slow, which ones are clever, which ones are watchdogs, and which ones hunters. you can classify each dog according to the natural gifts that separate it from all other dogs. it's the same with men. now, if you occupy some place in the list of men that isn't down at the very bottom, tell me. because if that's the case, i will tell you a plan that will get rid of your enemy and bring you closer to me. as long as banquo lives, i am sick. i'll be healthy when he is dead."], ["my lord, i've been so kicked around by the world, and i'm so angry, that i don't even care what i do.", "i'm the same. i'm so sick of bad luck and trouble that i'd risk my life on any bet, as long as it would either fix my life or end it once and for all.", "you both know banquo was your enemy.", "it's true, my lord.", "he's my enemy too, and i hate him so much that every minute he's alive it eats away at my heart. since i'm king, i could simply use my power to get rid of him. but i can't do that, because he and i have friends in common whom i need, so i have to be able to moan and cry over his death in public even though i'll be the one who had him killed. that's why i need your help right now. i have to hide my real plans from the public eye for many important reasons."], ["we'll do what you want us to, my lord.", "though our lives", "i can see the determination in your eyes. within the next hour i'll tell you where to go and exactly when to strike. it must be done tonight, away from the palace. always remember that i must be free from suspicion. for the plan to work perfectly, you must kill both banquo and his son, fleance, who keeps him company. getting rid of fleance is as important to me as knocking off banquo. each of you should make up your own mind about whether you're going to do this. i'll come to you soon.", "we have decided, my lord. we're in.", "i'll call for you soon. stay inside.", "the deal is closed. banquo, if your soul is going to make it to heaven, tonight's the night."], ["has banquo left the court?", "yes, madam, but he'll be back tonight.", "go tell the king i want to talk to him for a few minutes.", "no problem, madam.", "if you get what you want and you're still not happy, you've spent everything and gained nothing. it's better to be the person who gets murdered than to be the killer and be tormented with anxiety.", "what's going on, my lord? why are you keeping to yourself, with only your sad thoughts to keep you company? those thoughts should have died when you killed the men you're thinking about. if you can't fix it, you shouldn't give it a second thought. what's done is done.", "we have slashed the snake but not killed it. it will heal and be as good as new, and we'll be threatened by its fangs once again. but the universe can fall apart, and heaven and earth crumble, before i'll eat my meals in fear and spend my nights tossing and turning with these nightmares i've been having. i'd rather be dead than endure this endless mental torture and harrowing sleep deprivation. we killed those men and sent them to rest in peace so that we could gain our own peace. duncan lies in his grave, through with life's troubles, and he's sleeping well. we have already done the worst we can do to him with our treason. after that, nothing can hurt him further not weapons, poison, rebellion, invasion, or anything else."], ["come on, relax, dear. put on a happy face and look cheerful and agreeable for your guests tonight.", "that's exactly what i'll do, my love, and i hope you'll do the same. give banquo your special attention. talk to him and look at him in a way that will make him feel important. we're in a dangerous situation, where we have to flatter him and hide our true feelings.", "you have to stop talking like this.", "argh! i feel like my mind is full of scorpions, my dear wife. you know that banquo and his son fleance are still alive.", "but they can't live forever.", "that's comforting. they can be killed, it's true. so be cheerful. before the bat flies through the castle, and before the dung beetle makes his little humming noise to tell us it's nighttime, a dreadful deed will be done.", "what are you going to do?"], ["it's better you don't know about it until after it's done, when you can applaud it. come, night, and blindfold the kindhearted day. use your bloody and invisible hand to tear up banquo's lease on life, which keeps me in fear. the sky's getting dark, and the crow is returning home to the woods. the gentle creatures of the day are falling asleep, while night's predators are waking up to look for their prey. lady macbeth you seem surprised at my words, but don't question me yet. bad deeds force you to commit more bad deeds. so please, come with me."], ["but who told you to come here and join us?", "macbeth.", "we can trust this guy. he was given exactly the same orders we were.", "then stay with us. there's still a bit of daylight in the sky. now all the late travellers are hurrying to reach their inns. banquo is almost here.", "listen! i hear horses.", "hey, give us some light here!", "that must be him. the rest of the king's guests are already inside.", "you can hear his horses moving around as the servants take them to the stables.", "it's almost a mile to the palace gate, but banquo, like everybody else, usually walks from here to the palace."], ["here comes a light! here comes a light!", "that's him.", "prepare yourselves.", "it will rain tonight.", "then let the rain come down.", "oh, this is treachery! get out of here, good fleance, run, run, run! someday you can get revenge. oh, you bastard!", "who put out the light?", "wasn't that the best thing to do?", "there's only one body here. the son ran away.", "we failed in half of our mission.", "well, let's get out of here and tell macbeth what we did accomplish."], ["you know your own ranks, so you know where to sit. sit down. from the highest to the lowest of you, i bid you a hearty welcome.", "thanks to your majesty.", "i will walk around and mingle with all of you, playing the humble host. my wife will stay in her royal chair, but at the appropriate time i will have her welcome you all.", "say welcome to all of our friends for me, sir, for in my heart they are all welcome.", "and they respond to you with their hearts as well. the table is full on both sides. i will sit here in the middle. be free and happy. soon we will toast around the table.", "murderer there's blood on your face.", "then it must be banquo's.", "i'd rather see his blood splattered on your face than flowing through his veins. did you finish him off?"], ["my lord, his throat is cut. i did that to him.", "you are the best of the cutthroats. but whoever did the same to fleance must also be good. if you cut both their throats, then you are the absolute best.", "most royal sir, fleance has escaped.", "now i'm scared again. otherwise i would have been perfect, as solid as a piece of marble, as firm as a rock, as free as the air itself. but now i'm all tangled up with doubts and fears. but banquo's been taken care of?", "yes, my good lord. he's lying dead in a ditch, with twenty deep gashes in his head, any one of which would have been enough to kill him.", "thanks for that. the adult snake lies in the ditch. the young snake that escaped will in time become poisonous and threatening, but for now he has no fangs. get out of here. i'll talk to you again tomorrow.", "my royal lord, you're not entertaining the guests. if you don't make your guests know they're welcome, they'll feel like they're paying for their meal. when you just want to eat, it's better to do that at home. when you're eating out with people, you need to have a little more ceremony. otherwise dinner parties would be boring."], ["it's nice of you to remind me. since good digestion requires a good appetite, and good health requires both of those, here's to good appetites, good digestion, and good health!", "why don't you have a seat, your highness?", "we would have all the nobility of scotland gathered under one roof, if only banquo were here. i hope it turns out that he's late out of rudeness, and not because something bad has happened to him.", "his absence means he's broken his promise, sir. if it pleases you, your highness, why don't you sit with us and grace us with your royal company?", "the table's full.", "here's an empty seat, sir.", "where?", "ghost here, my good lord. what's wrong, your highness?", "ghost which one of you did this?", "what, my good lord?", "ghost you can't say i did it. don't shake your bloody head at me."], ["gentlemen, stand up. his highness is not well.", "sit down, worthy friends. my husband is often like this, and he has been since he was a child. please stay seated. this is just a brief fit. in a moment he'll be well again. if you pay too much attention to him you'll make him angry, and that will make his convulsions go on longer. eat your dinner and pay no attention to him. macbeth are you a man?", "yes, and a brave one, who dares to look at something that would frighten the devil.", "oh, that's nonsense! this is just another one of the hallucinations you always get when you're afraid. this is like that floating dagger you said was leading you toward duncan. these outbursts of yours don't even look like real fear. they're more like how you would act if you were a woman telling a scary story by the fireside in front of her grandmother. shame on you! why are you making these faces? when the vision passes, you'll see that you're just looking at a stool.", "please, just look over there. look! look! see! ghost what do you have to say? what do i care? if you can nod, then speak too. if the dead are going to return from their graves, then there's nothing to stop the birds from eating the bodies. so there's no point in our burying people.", "what, has your foolishness paralyzed you completely?"], ["as sure as i'm standing here, i saw him.", "nonsense!", "in ancient times, before there were laws to make the land safe and peaceful, a lot of blood was spilled. yes, and since then murders have been committed that are too awful to talk about. it used to be that when you knocked a man's brains out he would just die, and that would be it. but now they rise from the dead with twenty fatal head wounds and push us off our stools. this haunting business is even stranger than murder.", "my worthy lord, your noble friends miss your company.", "i forgot about them. don't be alarmed on my account, my most worthy friends. i have a strange disorder, which no longer shocks those who know me well. come, let's drink a toast: love and health to you all. now i'll sit down. give me some wine. fill up my cup.", "i drink to the happiness of everyone at the table, and to our dear friend banquo, whom we miss. i wish he were here! let's drink to everyone here, and to banquo. now, everybody, drink", "hear, hear."], ["ghost go! and get out of my sight! stay in your grave. there's no marrow in your bones, and your blood is cold. you're staring at me with eyes that have no power to see.", "good friends, think of this as nothing more than a strange habit. it's nothing else. too bad it's spoiling our pleasure tonight.", "i am as brave as any other man. come at me in the form of a rugged russian bear, an armor-plated rhinoceros, or a tiger from iran. take any shape other than the one you have now and i will never tremble in fear. or come back to life again and challenge me to a duel in some deserted place. if i tremble then, you can call me a little girl. get out of here, you horrible ghost, you hallucination. get out!", "i am a man again. pray you sit still.", "look, now that it's gone, i'm a man again. please, remain seated.", "you have ruined our good cheer and disrupted the gathering by making a spectacle of yourself.", "can things like this happen so suddenly without making us all astonished? you make me feel like i don't know myself, when i see you looking at these terrible things and keeping a straight face, while my face has gone white with fear.", "what things, my lord?"], ["please, don't speak to him. he's getting worse and worse. talk makes him crazy. everybody, please leave right now. don't bother exiting in the order of your rank, but just leave right away.", "good night. i hope the king recovers soon!", "a kind good night to all!", "there's an old saying: the dead will have their revenge. gravestones have been known to move, and trees to speak, to bring guilty men to justice. the craftiest murderers have been exposed by the mystical signs made by crows and magpies. how late at night is it?", "it's almost morning. you can't tell whether it's day or night.", "what do you think about the fact that macduff refuses to come to me when i command him?", "did you send for him, sir?", "i've heard about this indirectly, but i will send for him. in every one of the lords' households i have a servant paid to spy for me. tomorrow, while it's still early, i will go see the witches. they will tell me more, because i'm determined to know the worst about what's going to happen. my own safety is the only important thing now. i have walked so far into this river of blood that even if i stopped now, it would be as hard to go back to being good as it is to keep killing people. i have some schemes in my head that i'm planning to put into action. i have to do these things before i have a chance to think about them."], ["you haven't slept.", "yes, let's go to sleep. my strange self-delusions just come from inexperience. we're still just beginners when it comes to crime."], ["what's wrong, hecate? you look angry.", "don't i have a reason to be angry, you disobedient hags? how dare you give macbeth riddles and prophecies about his future without telling me? i am your boss and the source of your powers. i am the one who secretly decides what evil things happen, but you never called me to join in and show off my own powers. and what's worse, you've done all this for a man who behaves like a spoiled brat, angry and hateful. like all spoiled sons, he chases after what he wants and doesn't care about you. but you can make it up to me. go away now and in the morning meet me in the pit by the river in hell. macbeth will go there to learn his destiny. you bring your cauldrons, your spells, your charms, and everything else. i'm about to fly away. i'll spend tonight working to make something horrible happen. i have a lot to do before noon. an important droplet is hanging from the corner of the moon. i'll catch it before it falls to the ground. when i work it over with magic spells, the drop will produce magical spirits that will trick macbeth with illusions."], ["he will be fooled into thinking he is greater than fate, he will mock death, and he will think he is above wisdom, grace, and fear. as you all know, overconfidence is man's greatest enemy.", "listen! i'm being called. look, my little spirit is sitting in a foggy cloud waiting for me.", "come on, let's hurry. she'll be back again soon."], ["what i've already said shows you we think alike, so you can draw your own conclusions. all i'm saying is that strange things have been going on. macbeth pitied duncan after duncan was dead. and banquo went out walking too late at night. if you like, we can say that fleance must have killed him, because fleance fled the scene of the crime. clearly, men should not go out walking too late! and who can help thinking how monstrous it was for malcolm and donalbain to kill their gracious father? such a heinous crime how it saddened ! wasn't it loyal of him to kill those two servants right away, while they were still drunk and asleep? that was the right thing to do, wasn't it? yes, and it was the wise thing, too, because we all would have been outraged to hear those two deny their crime. considering all this, i think macbeth has handled things well. if he had duncan's sons in prison which i hope won't happen they would find out how awful the punishment is for those who kill their fathers, and so would fleance. but enough of that. i hear that macduff is out of favor with the king because he speaks his mind too plainly, and because he failed to show up at macbeth's feast. can you tell me where he's hiding himself?", "duncan's son malcolm, whose birthright and throne macbeth has stolen, lives in the english court. there, the saintly king edward treats malcolm so well that despite malcolm's misfortunes, he's not deprived of respect. macduff went there to ask king edward for help. he wants edward to help him form an alliance with the people of northumberland and their lord, siward. macduff hopes that with their help and with the help of god above he may once again put food on our tables, bring peace back to our nights, free our feasts and banquets from violent murders, allow us to pay proper homage to our king, and receive honors freely. those are the things we pine for now. macbeth has heard this news and he is so angry that he's preparing for war."], ["did he tell macduff to return to scotland?", "he did, but macduff told the messenger, \"no way.\" the messenger scowled and rudely turned his back on macduff, as if to say, \"you'll regret the day you gave me this answer.\"", "that might well keep macduff away from scotland. some holy angel should go to the court of england and give macduff a message. he should return quickly to free our country, which is suffering under a tyrant!", "i'll send my prayers with him."], ["the tawny cat has meowed three times.", "three times. and the hedgehog has whined once.", "my spirit friend, harpier, is yelling, \"it's time, it's time!\"", "dance around the cauldron and throw in the poisoned entrails. you'll go in first a toad that sat under a cold rock for a month, oozing poison from its pores.", "double, double toil and trouble, fire burn, and cauldron bubble.", "we'll boil you in the cauldron next a slice of swamp snake. all the rest of you in too: a newt's eye, a frog's tongue, fur from a bat, a dog's tongue, the forked tongue of an adder, the stinger of a burrowing worm, a lizard's leg, an owl's wing. make a charm to cause powerful trouble, and boil and bubble like a broth of hell.", "double, double toil and trouble, fire burn and cauldron bubble."], ["here come some more ingredients: the scale of a dragon, a wolf's tooth, a witch's mummified flesh, the gullet and stomach of a ravenous shark, a root of hemlock that was dug up in the dark, a jew's liver, a goat's bile, some twigs of yew that were broken off during a lunar eclipse, a turk's nose, a tartar's lips, the finger of a baby that was strangled as a prostitute gave birth to it in a ditch. make this potion thick and gluey. witches now let's add a tiger's entrails to the mix.", "double, double toil and trouble, fire burn and cauldron bubble.", "we'll cool the mixture with baboon blood. after that the charm is finished.", "well done! i admire your efforts, and all of you will share the rewards. now come sing around the cauldron like a ring of elves and fairies, enchanting everything you put in.", "i can tell that something wicked is coming by the tingling in my thumbs. doors, open up for whoever is knocking!"], ["what's going on here, you secret, evil, midnight hags? what are you doing?", "something there isn't a word for.", "i don't know how you know the things you do, but i insist that you answer my questions. i command you in the name of whatever dark powers you serve. i don't care if you unleash violent winds that tear down churches, make the foamy waves overwhelm ships and send sailors to their deaths, flatten crops and trees, make castles fall down on their inhabitants' heads, make palaces and pyramids collapse, and mix up everything in nature. tell me what i want to know.", "speak.", "demand.", "we'll answer.", "would you rather hear these things from our mouths or from our master's?", "call them. let me see them.", "pour in the blood of a sow who has eaten her nine offspring. take the sweat of a murderer on the gallows and throw it into the flame."], ["come, high or low spirits. show yourself and what you do.", "tell me, you unknown power", "he can read your thoughts. listen, but don't speak.", "macbeth! macbeth! macbeth! beware macduff. beware the thane of fife. let me go. enough.", "whatever you are, thanks for your advice. you have guessed exactly what i feared. but one word more", "he will not be commanded by you. here's another, stronger than the first.", "macbeth! macbeth! macbeth!", "if i had three ears i'd listen with all three.", "be violent, bold, and firm. laugh at the power of other men, because nobody born from a woman will ever harm macbeth.", "second apparition ."], ["then i don't need to kill macduff. i have no reason to fear him. but even so, i'll make doubly sure. i'll guarantee my own fate by having you killed, macduff. that way i can conquer my own fear and sleep easy at night.", "what is this spirit that looks like the son of a king and wears a crown on his young head?", "listen but don't speak to it.", "be brave like the lion and proud. don't even worry about who hates you, who resents you, and who conspires against you. macbeth will never be defeated until birnam wood marches to fight you at dunsinane hill.", "that will never happen. who can command the forest and make the trees pull their roots out of the earth? these were sweet omens! good! my murders will never come back to threaten me until the forest of birnam gets up and moves, and i will be king for my entire natural life. but my heart is still throbbing to know one thing. tell me, if your dark powers can see this far: will banquo's sons ever reign in this kingdom?"], ["don't try to find out more.", "i demand to be satisfied. if you refuse, let an eternal curse fall on you. let me know. why is that cauldron sinking? and what is that music?", "show.", "show.", "show.", "show him and make him grieve. come like shadows and depart in the same way!", "you look too much like the ghost of banquo. go away! your crown hurts my eyes. your blond hair, which looks like another crown underneath the one you're wearing, looks just like the first king's hair. now i see a third king who looks just like the second. filthy hags! why are you showing me this? a fourth! my eyes are bulging out of their sockets! will this line stretch on forever? another one! and a seventh! i don't want to see any more. and yet an eighth appears, holding a mirror in which i see many more men. and some are carrying double balls and triple scepters, meaning they're kings of more than one country! horrible sight! now i see it is true, they are banquo's descendants. banquo, with his blood-clotted hair, is smiling at me and pointing to them as his."], ["what? is this true?", "yes, this is true, but why do you stand there so dumbfounded? come, sisters, let's cheer him up and show him our talents. i will charm the air to produce music while you all dance around like crazy, so this king will say we did our duty and entertained him.", "where are they? gone? let this evil hour be marked forever in the calendar as cursed. you outside, come in!", "what does your grace want?", "did you see the weird sisters?", "no, my lord.", "didn't they pass by you?", "no, indeed, my lord.", "the air on which they ride is infected. damn all those who trust them! i heard the galloping of horses. who was it that came here?"], ["two or three men, my lord, who brought the message that macduff has fled to england.", "fled to england?", "yes, my good lord.", "time, you thwart my dreadful plans. unless a person does something the second he thinks of it, he'll never get a chance to do it. from now on, as soon as i decide to do something i'm going to act immediately. in fact, i'll start following up my thoughts with actions right now. i'll raid macduff's castle, seize the town of fife, and kill his wife, his children, and anyone else unfortunate enough to stand in line for his inheritance. no more foolish talk. i will do this deed before i lose my sense of purpose. but no more spooky visions! where are the messengers? come, bring me to them."], ["what did he do that made him flee this land?", "you have to be patient, madam.", "he had no patience. he was crazy to run away. even if you're not a traitor, you're going to look like one if you run away.", "you don't know whether it was wisdom or fear that made him flee.", "how could it be wisdom! to leave his wife, his children, his house, and his titles in a place so unsafe that he himself flees it! he doesn't love us. he lacks the natural instinct to protect his family. even the fragile wren, the smallest of birds, will fight against the owl when it threatens her young ones in the nest. his running away has everything to do with fear and nothing to do with love. and since it's so unreasonable for him to run away, it has nothing to do with wisdom either.", "my dearest relative, i'm begging you, pull yourself together. as for your husband, he is noble, wise, and judicious, and he understands what the times require. it's not safe for me to say much more than this, but times are bad when people get denounced as traitors and don't even know why. in times like these, we believe frightening rumors but we don't even know what we're afraid of. it's like being tossed around on the ocean in every direction, and finally getting nowhere. i'll say good-bye now. it won't be long before i'm back. when things are at their worst they have to stop, or else improve to the way things were before. my young cousin, i put my blessing upon you."], ["he has a father, and yet he is fatherless.", "i have to go. if i stay longer, i'll embarrass you and disgrace myself by crying. i'm leaving now.", "young man, your father's dead. what are you going to do now? how are you going to live?", "i will live the way birds do, mother.", "what? are you going to start eating worms and flies?", "i mean i will live on whatever i get, like birds do.", "you'd be a pitiful bird. you wouldn't know enough to be afraid of traps.", "why should i be afraid of them, mother? if i'm a pitiful bird, like you say, hunters won't want me. no matter what you say, my father is not dead.", "yes, he is dead. what are you going to do for a father?", "maybe you should ask, what will you do for a husband?", "oh, i can buy twenty husbands at any market."], ["if so, you'd be buying them to sell again.", "you talk like a child, but you're very smart anyway.", "was my father a traitor, mother?", "yes, he was.", "what is a traitor?", "someone who makes a promise and breaks it.", "and is everyone who swears and lies a traitor?", "everyone who does so is a traitor and should be hanged.", "and should everyone who makes promises and breaks them be hanged?", "everyone.", "who should hang them?", "the honest men.", "then the liars are fools, for there are enough liars in the world to beat up the honest men and hang them.", "heaven help you for saying that, boy! but what will you do without a father?", "if he were dead, you'd be weeping for him. if you aren't weeping, it's a good sign that i'll soon have a new father.", "silly babbler, how you talk!"], ["bless you, fair lady! you don't know me, but i know you're an important person. i'm afraid something dangerous is coming toward you. if you'll take a simple man's advice, don't be here when it arrives. go away and take your children. i feel bad for scaring you like this, but it would be much worse for me to let you come to harm. and harm is getting close! heaven keep you safe!", "where should i go? i haven't done anything wrong. but i have to remember that i'm here on earth, where doing evil is often praised, and doing good is sometimes a stupid and dangerous mistake. so then why should i offer this womanish defense that i'm innocent?", "who are these men?", "where is your husband?", "i hope he's not anywhere so disreputable that thugs like you can find him.", "he's a traitor.", "you're lying, you shaggy-haired villain!"], ["what's that, you runt? young son of a traitor!", "he has killed me, mother. run away, i beg you!"], ["let's seek out some shady place where we can sit down alone and cry our hearts out.", "instead of crying, let's keep hold of our swords and defend our fallen homeland like honorable men. each day new widows howl, new orphans cry, and new sorrows slap heaven in the face, until it sounds like heaven itself feels scotland's anguish and screams in pain.", "i will avenge whatever i believe is wrong. and i'll believe whatever i'm sure is true. and i'll put right whatever i can when the time comes. what you just said may perhaps be true. this tyrant, whose mere name is so awful it hurts us to say it, was once considered an honest man. you were one of his favorites. he hasn't done anything to harm you yet. i'm inexperienced, but maybe you're planning to win macbeth's favor by betraying me to him. it would be smart to offer someone poor and innocent like me as a sacrificial lamb to satisfy an angry god like macbeth.", "i am not treacherous.", "but macbeth is. even someone with a good and virtuous nature might give way to a royal command. but i beg your pardon. my fears can't actually make you evil. angels are still bright even though lucifer, the brightest angel, fell from heaven. even though everything evil wants to look good, good still has to look good too."], ["i have lost my hope of convincing you to fight against macbeth.", "maybe you lost your hopes about me where i found my doubts about you. why did you leave your wife and child vulnerable the most precious things in your life, those strong bonds of love? how could you leave them behind? but i beg you, don't interpret my suspicions as slander against you. you must understand that i want to protect myself. you may really be honest, no matter what i think.", "bleed, bleed, poor country! great tyrant, go ahead and build yourself up, because good people are afraid to stand up to you. enjoy everything you stole, because your title is safe! farewell, lord. i wouldn't be the villain you think i am even if i were offered all of macbeth's kingdom and the riches of the east too.", "don't be offended. i don't completely distrust you. i do think scotland is sinking under macbeth's oppression. our country weeps, it bleeds, and each day a fresh cut is added to her wounds. i also think there would be many people willing to fight for me. the english have promised me thousands of troops. but even so, when i have macbeth's head under my foot, or stuck on the end of my sword, then my poor country will be plagued by worse evil than it was before. it will suffer worse and in more ways than ever under the reign of the king who follows macbeth.", "who are you talking about?"], ["i'm talking about myself. i know i have so many vices that when people see all of them exposed, evil macbeth will seem as pure as snow in comparison, and poor scotland will call him a sweet lamb when they compare him to me and my infinite evils.", "even in hell you couldn't find a devil worse than macbeth.", "i admit that he's murderous, lecherous, greedy, lying, deceitful, violent, malicious, and guilty of every sin that has a name. but there is no end, absolutely none, to my sexual desires. your wives, your daughters, your old women, and your young maids together could not satisfy my lust. my desire would overpower all restraints and anyone who stood in my way. it would be better for macbeth to rule than someone like me.", "endless greed and lust in a man's nature is a kind of tyranny. it has caused the downfall of many kings. but don't be afraid to take the crown that belongs to you. you can find a way to satisfy your desires in secret, while still appearing virtuous. you can deceive everyone. there are more than enough willing women around. your lust can't possibly be so strong that you'd use up all the women willing to give themselves to the king once they find out he wants them."], ["along with being full of lust, i'm also incredibly greedy. if i became king, i would steal the nobles' lands, taking jewels from one guy and houses from another. the more i had, the greedier i would grow, until i'd invent false quarrels with my good and loyal subjects, destroying them so i could get my hands on their wealth.", "the greed you're talking about is worse than lust because you won't outgrow it. greed has been the downfall of many kings. but don't be afraid. scotland has enough treasures to satisfy you out of your own royal coffers. these bad qualities are bearable when balanced against your good sides.", "but i don't have any good sides. i don't have a trace of the qualities a king needs, such as justice, truth, moderation, stability, generosity, perseverance, mercy, humility, devotion, patience, courage, and bravery. instead, i overflow with every variation of all the different vices. no, if i had power i would take world peace and throw it down to hell.", "oh scotland, scotland!", "if someone like me is fit to be king, let me know. i really am exactly as i have described myself to you."], ["malcolm fit to be king? you're not fit to live! oh miserable nation, ruled by a usurping, murderous tyrant, when will you see peaceful days again? the man who has a legal right to the throne is, by his own admission, a cursed man and a disgrace to the royal family. your royal father duncan was a virtuous king. your mother spent more time on her knees in prayer than she did standing up, and she lived a life of absolute piety. good-bye. the evils you have described inside yourself have driven me out of scotland forever. oh my heart, your hope is dead!", "macduff, this passionate outburst, which proves your integrity, has removed my doubts about you and made me realize that you really are trustworthy and honorable. that devil macbeth has tried many times to trick me and lure me into his power, and prudence prevents me from believing people too quickly. but with god as my witness, i will let myself be guided by you, and i take back my confession. i take back all the bad things i said about myself, because none of those flaws are really part of my character. i'm still a virgin. i have never told a lie. i barely care about what i already own, let alone feel jealous of another's possessions. i have never broken a promise. i wouldn't betray the devil himself. i love truth as much as i love life. the lies i told about my character are actually the first false words i have ever spoken. the person who i really am is ready to serve you and our poor country."], ["indeed, before you arrived here, old siward, with ten thousand soldiers already prepared for battle, was making his way here. now we will fight macbeth together, and may the chances of our success be as great as the justice of our cause! why are you silent?", "it's hard to make sense of such different stories.", "well, we'll speak more soon. doctor is king edward coming out?", "yes, sir. a crowd of sick people is waiting for him to heal them. their illness confounds the most advanced techniques of modern medicine, but when he touches them, they heal immediately because of the power granted to him by heaven.", "thank you, doctor.", "what disease is he talking about?", "it's called the evil. edward's healing touch is a miracle that i have seen him perform many times during my stay in england. how he receives these gifts from heaven, only he can say. but he cures people with strange conditions all swollen, plagued by ulcers, and pitiful to look at, patients who are beyond the help of surgery by placing a gold coin around their necks and saying holy prayers over them."], ["they say that he bequeaths this ability to heal to his royal descendants. along with this strange power, he also has the gift of prophecy and various other abilities. all of these signs mark him as a man graced by god.", "who's that coming over here?", "by his dress i can tell he's my countryman, but i don't recognize him.", "my noble kinsman, welcome.", "i recognize him now. may god alter the circumstances that keep us apart!", "hello, sir.", "is scotland the same as when i left it?", "alas, our poor country! it's too frightened to look at itself. scotland is no longer the land where we were born; it's the land where we'll die. where no one ever smiles except for the fool who knows nothing. where sighs, groans, and shrieks rip through the air but no one notices. where violent sorrow is a common emotion. when the funeral bells ring, people no longer ask who died. good men die before the flowers in their caps wilt. they die before they even fall sick.", "oh, your report is too poetic, but it sounds so true!"], ["what is the most recent news?", "even news an hour old is old news. every minute another awful thing happens.", "how is my wife?", "she's well.", "and all my children?", "they're well too.", "macbeth hasn't attacked them?", "they were when i left them.", "don't be stingy with your words. what's the news?", "while i was coming here to tell you my sad news, i heard rumors that many good men are arming themselves to rebel against macbeth. when i saw macbeth's army on the move, i knew the rumors must be true. now is the time when we need your help. your presence in scotland would inspire people to fight. even the women would fight to rid themselves of macbeth's oppression.", "let them be comforted i'm returning to scotland. gracious king edward has sent us noble siward and ten thousand soldiers. there is no soldier more experienced or successful than siward in the entire christian world."], ["i wish i could repay this happy news with good news of my own. but i have some news that should be howled in a barren desert where nobody can hear it.", "what is this news about? does it affect all of us? or just one of us?", "no decent man can keep from sharing in the sorrow, but my news affects you alone.", "if it's for me, don't keep it from me. let me have it now.", "i hope you won't hate me forever after i say these things, because i will soon fill your ears with the most dreadful news you have ever heard.", "i think i can guess what you're about to say.", "your castle was attacked. your wife and children were savagely slaughtered. if i told you how they were killed, it would cause you so much pain that it would kill you too, and add your body to the pile of murdered corpses.", "merciful heaven! macduff come on, man, don't keep your grief hidden. put your sorrow into words. the grief you keep inside you will whisper in your heart until it breaks.", "they killed my children too?", "they killed your wife, your children, your servants, anyone they could find."], ["and i had to be away! my wife was killed too?", "i said she was.", "take comfort. let's cure this awful grief by taking revenge on macbeth.", "he doesn't have children. all my pretty little children? did you say all? oh, that bird from hell! all of them? what, all my children and their mother dead in one fell swoop?", "fight it like a man.", "i will. but i also have to feel it like a man. i can't help remembering the things that were most precious to me. did heaven watch the slaughter and not send down any help? sinful macduff, they were killed because of you! as wicked as i am, they were slaughtered because of me, not because of anything they did. may god give their souls rest.", "let this anger sharpen your sword. transform your grief into anger. don't block the feelings in your heart; let them loose as rage.", "i could go on weeping like a woman and bragging about how i will avenge them! but gentle heavens, don't keep me waiting. bring me face to face with macbeth, that devil of scotland. put him within the reach of my sword, and if he escapes, may heaven forgive him as well!"], ["now you sound like a man. come on, let's go see king edward. the army is ready. all we have to do now is say goodbye to the king. macbeth is ripe for the picking. we'll be acting as god's agents. cheer up as much as you can. a new day will come at last."], ["i've stayed up with you for two nights now, and i haven't seen any evidence of what you were talking about. when was the last time you saw her sleepwalking?", "since macbeth went to war, i have seen her rise from her bed, put on her nightgown, unlock her closet, take out some paper, fold it, write on it, read it, seal it up, and then return to bed, remaining asleep the entire time.", "it's unnatural to be asleep and act as if you're awake. when she is like this, besides walking and performing various activities, have you heard her say anything?", "she says something, sir, but i will not repeat it to you.", "you can tell me. you really should.", "i will not confess it to you nor to anyone else, because there was no one else to witness her speech.", "look, here she comes! this is exactly how she always looks, and i swear it she is fast asleep. watch her. keep hidden.", "how did she get that candle?"], ["it stands by her bedside. she always has to have a light next to her. those are her orders.", "you see, her eyes are open.", "yes, but they don't see anything.", "what's she doing now? look how she rubs her hands.", "she often does that. she looks like she's washing her hands. i've seen her do that before for as long as fifteen minutes.", "there's still a spot here.", "listen! she's talking. i'll write down what she says, so i'll remember it better.", "come out, damned spot! out, i command you! one, two. ok, it's time to do it now. hell is murky! nonsense, my lord, nonsense! you are a soldier, and yet you are afraid? why should we be scared, when no one can lay the guilt upon us? but who would have thought the old man would have had so much blood in him?", "did you hear that?", "the thane of fife had a wife. where is she now? what, will my hands never be clean? no more of that, my lord, no more of that. you'll ruin everything by acting startled like this.", "now look what you've done. you've heard something you shouldn't have."], ["she said something she shouldn't have said, i'm sure of that. heaven knows what secrets she's keeping.", "i still have the smell of blood on my hand. all the perfumes of arabia couldn't make my little hand smell better. oh, oh, oh!", "what a heavy sigh! her heart is carrying a heavy weight.", "i wouldn't want a heart like hers even if you made me queen.", "well, well, well.", "i hope what she's saying is well, sir!", "this disease is beyond my medical skills. but i have known people who sleepwalked and weren't guilty of anything.", "wash your hands. put on your nightgown. don't look so frightened. i tell you again, banquo is buried. he cannot come out of his grave.", "is this true?", "to bed, to bed! there's a knocking at the gate. come, come, come, come, give me your hand. what's done cannot be undone. to bed, to bed, to bed!", "will she go to bed now?"], ["yes, right away.", "evil rumors are going around. unnatural acts will cause things to happen. people with guilty and deranged minds will confess their secrets to their pillows as they sleep. this woman needs a priest more than a doctor. god forgive us all! gentlewoman look after her. remove anything she might hurt herself with. watch her constantly. and now, good-night. she has bewildered my mind and amazed my eyes. i have an opinion, but i don't dare to say it out loud.", "good night, good doctor."], ["the english army is near, led by malcolm, his uncle siward, and the good macduff. they burn for revenge. the wrongs they have suffered would make dead men rise up and fight.", "we'll meet them near birnam wood. they are coming that way.", "does anyone know if donalbain is with his brother?", "he is definitely not there, sir. i have a list of all the important men. siward's son is there, as well as many boys too young to have beards who will become men by joining in this battle.", "what is the tyrant macbeth doing?", "he is fortifying his castle at dunsinane with heavy defenses. some say he's insane. those who hate him less call it brave anger. one thing is certain: he's out of control.", "now macbeth feels the blood of his murdered enemies sticking to his hands. now, rebel armies punish him every minute for his treachery. the soldiers he commands are only following orders. they don't fight because they love macbeth. now he seems too small to be a great king, like a midget trying to wear the robes of a giant."], ["who can blame him for acting crazy, when inside he condemns himself for everything he's done?", "well, let's keep marching and give our loyalty to someone who truly deserves it. we're going to meet malcolm, the doctor who will cure our sick country. we'll pour out our own blood to help him.", "however much blood we need to give to water the royal flower and drown the weeds to make malcolm king and get rid of macbeth. let's proceed on our march to birnam."], ["don't bring me any more reports. i don't care if all the thanes desert me. until birnam wood gets up and moves to dunsinane, i won't be affected by fear. what's the boy malcolm? wasn't he born from a woman? the spirits that know the future have told me this: \"don't be afraid, macbeth. no man born from a woman will ever defeat you.\" so get out of here, disloyal thanes, and join the weak and decadent english! my mind and courage will never falter with doubt or shake with fear.", "may the devil turn you black, you white-faced fool! why do you look like a frightened goose?", "there are ten thousand", "geese, you idiot?", "soldiers, sir.", "go pinch your cheeks and bring some color back into your face, you cowardly boy. what soldiers, fool? curse you! that pale face of yours will frighten the others as well. what soldiers, milk-face?", "the english army, sir.", "get out of my sight."], ["seyton! i'm sick at heart when i see seyton, come here! this battle will either secure my reign forever or else topple me from the throne. i have lived long enough. the course of my life is beginning to wither and fall away, like a yellowing leaf in autumn. the things that should go along with old age, like honor, love, obedience, and loyal friends, i cannot hope to have. instead, i have passionate but quietly whispered curses, people who honor me with their words but not in their hearts, and lingering life, which my heart would gladly end, though i can't bring myself to do it. seyton!", "what do you want?", "is there more news?", "all the rumors have been confirmed.", "i'll fight until they hack the flesh off my bones. give me my armor.", "you don't need it yet.", "i'll put it on anyway. send out more cavalry. scour the whole country and hang anyone spreading fear. give me my armor. doctor how is my wife, doctor?", "she is not sick, my lord, but she is troubled with endless visions that keep her from sleeping."], ["cure her of that. can't you treat a diseased mind? take away her memory of sorrow? use some drug to erase the troubling thoughts from her brain and ease her heart?", "for that kind of relief, the patient must heal herself.", "medicine is for the dogs. i won't have anything to do with it. seyton come, put my armor on me. give me my lance. seyton, send out the soldiers. doctor doctor, the thanes are running away from me. seyton come on, sir, hurry. doctor can you figure out what's wrong with my country? if you can diagnose its disease by examining its urine, and bring it back to health, i will praise you to the ends of the earth, where the sound will echo back so you can hear the applause again. seyton pull it off, i tell you. doctor what drug would purge the english from this country? have you heard of any?", "yes, my good lord. your preparation for war sounds like something.", "seyton bring the armor and follow me. i will not be afraid of death and destruction until birnam forest picks itself up and moves to dunsinane.", "i wish i were far away from dunsinane. you couldn't pay me to come back here."], ["kinsmen, i hope the time is coming when people will be safe in their own bedrooms.", "we don't doubt it.", "what's the name of this forest behind us?", "birnam wood.", "tell every soldier to break off a branch and hold it in front of him. that way we can conceal how many of us there are, and macbeth's spies will give him inaccurate reports.", "we'll do it.", "we have no news except that the overconfident macbeth is still in dunsinane and will allow us to lay siege to the castle.", "he wants us to lay siege. wherever his soldiers have an opportunity to leave him, they do, whatever rank they are. no one fights with him except men who are forced to, and their hearts aren't in it.", "we shouldn't make any judgments until we achieve our goal. let's go fight like hardworking soldiers."], ["soon we'll find out what's really ours and what isn't. it's easy for us to get our hopes up just sitting around thinking about it, but the only way this is really going to be settled is by violence. so let's move our armies forward."], ["hang our flags on the outer walls. everyone keeps yelling, \"here they come!\" our castle is strong enough to laugh off their seige. they can sit out there until they die of hunger and disease. if it weren't for the fact that so many of our soldiers revolted and joined them, we could have met them out in front of the castle, man to man, and beaten them back to england.", "what's that noise?", "it's women crying, my good lord.", "i've almost forgotten what fear feels like. there was a time when i would have been terrified by a shriek in the night, and the hair on my skin would have stood up when i heard a ghost story. but now i've had my fill of real horrors. horrible things are so familiar that they can't startle me.", "what was that cry for?", "the queen is dead, my lord."], ["she would have died later anyway. that news was bound to come someday. tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow. the days creep slowly along until the end of time. and every day that's already happened has taken fools that much closer to their deaths. out, out, brief candle. life is nothing more than an illusion. it's like a poor actor who struts and worries for his hour on the stage and then is never heard from again. life is a story told by an idiot, full of noise and emotional disturbance but devoid of meaning.", "you've come to tell me something. tell me quickly.", "my gracious lord, i should tell you what i saw, but i don't know how to say it.", "just say it.", "as i was standing watch on the hill, i looked toward birnam, and i thought i saw the forest begin to move.", "liar and slave!", "punish me if it's not true. three miles from here you can see it coming, a moving forest."], ["if you're lying, i'll hang you alive from the nearest tree until you die of hunger. if what you say is true, you can do the same to me. my confidence is failing. i'm starting to doubt the lies the devil told me, which sounded like truth. \"don't worry until birnam wood comes to dunsinane.\" and now a wood is coming to dunsinane. prepare for battle, and go! if what this messenger says is true, it's no use running away or staying here. i'm starting to grow tired of living, and i'd like to see the world plunged into chaos. ring the alarms! blow, wind! come, ruin! at least we'll die with our armor on."], ["we're close enough now. throw down these branches and show them who you really are. uncle siward, you and your son will lead the first battle. brave macduff and i will do the rest, according to our battle plan.", "good luck. if we meet macbeth's army tonight, let us be beaten if we cannot fight.", "blow all the trumpets. they loudly announce the news of blood and death."], ["they have me tied to a stake. i can't run away. i have to stand and fight, like a .where's the man who wasn't born from a woman? he's the only one i'm afraid of, nobody else.", "what's your name?", "you'll be afraid to hear it.", "no i won't, even if you were one of the worst demons in hell.", "my name's macbeth.", "the devil himself couldn't say a name i hate more.", "no, nor could the devil's name be more frightening.", "you lie, you disgusting tyrant. i'll prove with my sword that i'm not scared of you.", "you were born from a woman. swords don't frighten me. i laugh at any weapon used by a man who was born from a woman."], ["the noise is coming from over there. tyrant, show your face! if someone other than me kills you, the ghosts of my wife and children will haunt me forever. i can't be bothered to fight these lame soldiers who only fight for money. i'll either fight you, macbeth, or else i'll put down my sword unused. you must be over there. by the great noise, it sounds like one of the highest-ranking men is being announced. i hope i find him! i ask for nothing more than that.", "come this way, my lord. the castle has been surrendered without a fight. macbeth's soldiers are fighting on both sides. our noblemen are battling bravely. the victory is almost yours, and it seems like there's not much left to do.", "our enemies fight as if they're trying not to hurt us.", "sir, enter the castle."], ["why should i commit suicide like one of the ancient romans? as long as i see enemies of mine alive, i would rather see my sword wound them than me.", "turn around, you dog from hell, turn around!", "you are the only man i have avoided. but go away now. i'm already guilty of killing your whole family.", "i have nothing to say to you. my sword will talk for me. you are too evil for words!", "you're wasting your time trying to wound me. you might as well try to stab the air with your sword. go fight someone who can be harmed. i lead a charmed life, which can't be ended by anyone born from a woman.", "you can forget about your charm. the evil spirit you serve can tell you that i was not born. they cut me out of my mother's womb before she could bear me naturally."], ["curse you for telling me this. you've fightened away my courage. i don't believe those evil creatures anymore. they tricked me with their wordgames, raising my hopes and then destroying them. i won't fight you.", "then surrender, coward, and we'll put you in a freakshow, just like they do with deformed animals. we'll put a picture of you on a sign, right above the words \"come see the tyrant!\"", "i'm not going to surrender and have to kiss the ground in front of malcolm, or be taunted by the common people. even though birnam wood really did come to dunsinane, and i'm fighting a man not of woman born, i'll fight to the end. i'll put up my shield and battle you. come on, let's go at it, macduff, and damn the first man who cries, 'stop! enough!'", "i wish all of our friends could have survived this battle.", "in every battle, some people will always be killed, but judging from the men i see around us, our great victory didn't cost us very much.", "macduff is missing, and so is your noble son.", "my lord, your son has paid the soldier's price: death. he only lived long enough to become a man, and as soon as he proved that he was a man by fighting like one, he died."], ["so he's dead?", "yes, and he's been carried off the field. your grief should not be equal to his worth, because then your sorrow would never end.", "were his wounds on his front side?", "yes, on his front.", "well then, he's god's soldier now! if i had as many sons as i have hairs on my head, i couldn't hope that any of them would die more honorably than he did. and that's all there is to it.", "he is worth more mourning than that, and i will mourn for him.", "he is worth no more than that. they tell me he died well, and settled his scores. with that, i hope god is with him! here comes better news.", "hail, king! because that's what you are now. look, here i have macbeth's cursed head. we are free from his tyranny. i see that you have the kingdom's noblemen around you, and they're thinking the same thing as me. i want them to join me in this loud cheer, hail, king of scotland!"], ["hail, king of scotland!", "it won't be long before i reward each of you as he deserves. my thanes and kinsmen, i name you all earls, the first earls that scotland has ever had. we have a lot to do at the dawn of this new era. we must call home all of our exiled friends who fled from the grip of macbeth's tyranny, and we must bring to justice all the evil ministers of this dead butcher and his demon-like queen, who, rumor has it, committed suicide. this, and whatever else we are called to do by god, we will do at the right time and in the right place. so i thank you all, and i invite each and every one of you to come watch me be crowned king of scotland at scone."]], [["to be honest, i don't know why i'm so sad. i'm tired of it, and you say you're tired of it too. but i have no idea how i got so depressed. and if i can't figure out what's making me depressed, i must not understand myself very well.", "you're worried about your ships. your mind is out there getting tossed around on the ocean with them. but they're fine. they're like huge parade floats on the sea. they're so big they look down on the smaller ships, which all have to bow and then get out of the way. your ships fly like birds past those little boats.", "yes, believe me, if i had such risky business ventures in other countries, i'd be sad too. i'd worry about it every second. i'd constantly be tossing blades of grass into the air to find out which way the wind was blowing. i'd be peering over maps to figure out the best ports, piers, and waterways. everything that made me worry about my ships would make me sad."], ["i'd get scared every time i blew on my soup to cool it, thinking of how a strong wind could wipe out my ships. every time i glanced at the sand in an hourglass i'd imagine my ships wrecked on sandbars. i'd think of dangerous rocks every time i went to church and saw the stones it was made of. if my ship brushed up against rocks like that, its whole cargo of spices would be dumped into the sea. all of its silk shipments would be sent flying into the roaring waters. in one moment i'd go bankrupt. who wouldn't get sad thinking about things like that? it's obvious. antonio is sad because he's so worried about his cargo.", "no, that's not it, trust me. thankfully my financial situation is healthy. i don't have all of my money invested in one ship, or one part of the world. if i don't do well this year, i'll still be okay. so it's not my business that's making me sad.", "well then, you must be in love.", "oh, give me a break.", "you're not in love either? fine, let's just say you're sad because you're not in a good mood. you know, it'd be just as easy for you to laugh and dance around and say you're in a good mood. you could just say you're not sad. humans are so different."], ["some people will laugh at anything, and others are so grouchy they won't even crack a smile when they hear something hysterically funny.", "here comes your cousin bassanio. and gratiano and lorenzo too. goodbye, then. we'll leave you to talk to them. they're better company.", "i would've stayed to cheer you up, if your nobler friends hadn't shown up.", "you're both very precious to me. but i understand. you need to leave to take care of your own business.", "bassanio lorenzo gratiano good morning, gentlemen.", "salarino solanio hello, friends. when are we going to have fun together again? just name the time. we never see you anymore. does it have to be that way?", "let us know when you want to get together. we're available.", "bassanio, we'll say goodbye for now, since you've found antonio. but don't forget, we're meeting for dinner tonight.", "don't worry, i'll be there."], ["you don't look well, antonio. you're taking things too seriously. people with too much invested in the world always get hurt. i'm telling you, you don't look like yourself.", "for me the world is just the world, gratiano a stage where every person has a part to play. i play a sad one.", "then i'll play the happy fool and get laugh lines on my face. i'd rather overload my liver with wine than starve my heart by denying myself fun. why should any living man sit still like a statue? why should he sleep when he's awake? why should he get ulcers from being crabby all the time? i love you, and i'm telling you this because i care about you, antonio there are men who always look serious. their faces never move or show any expression, like stagnant ponds covered with scum. they're silent and stern, and they think they're wise and deep, important and respectable. when they talk, they think everybody else should keep quiet, and that even dogs should stop barking. i know a lot of men like that, antonio. the only reason they're considered wise is because they don't say anything. i'm sure if they ever opened their mouths, everyone would see what fools they are. i'll talk to you more about this some other time. in the meantime, cheer up. don't go around looking so glum. that's my opinion, but what do i know? i'm a fool. let's go, lorenzo. goodbye for now. i'll finish my lecture after dinner."], ["all right, we'll see you at dinnertime. i must be one of these silent so-called wise men gratiano's talking about, because he never lets me get a word in.", "if you hang around me for two more years, you'll forget the sound of your own voice. i won't ever let you speak.", "goodbye. after that lecture of yours, i'll start talking a lot.", "thank you. the only tongues that should be silent are ox-tongues on a dinner plate and those that belong to old maids.", "is he right?", "gratiano talks more nonsense than any other man in venice. his point is always like a needle in a haystack you look for it all day, and when you find it you realize it wasn't worth the trouble.", "so, who's this girl, the one you said you were going to take a special trip for? you promised to tell me.", "antonio, you know how bad my finances have been lately. i've been living way beyond my means. don't get me wrong, i'm not complaining about having to cut back."], ["i just want to be honorable and pay off the big debts that piled up when i was living the high life. i'm in debt to many people, and i owe most to you, antonio both money and gratitude. and because you care about me, i know you'll let me tell you my plan to clear all my debts.", "please let me know your plan, bassanio. as long as it's honorable, you can be sure that i'll let you use all my money and do everything i can to help you.", "back when i was a schoolboy, if i lost an arrow i would try to find it by shooting another arrow in the same direction, watching the second arrow more carefully than i had the first. by risking the second arrow, i'd often get both of them back. i'm telling you this story for a reason. i owe you a lot, and like a spoiled kid i've lost what i owe you. but if you'd be willing to shoot another arrow the same way you shot the first, i'll watch your arrow more carefully this time. either we'll get back all the money i owe you, or else we'll get back what you lend me this time, and i'll just owe you what i already owe you.", "you know me better than that. you're wasting your breath. all of this talk means you have doubts about my friendship. that's worse than if you bankrupted me. just tell me what to do, and i'll do it. tell me."], ["there's a girl in belmont who's inherited a huge amount of money, and she's beautiful and even better she's a good person. i think she likes me. sometimes the expression on her face tells me she likes me. her name is portia. she's as rich as that famous roman heroine portia, the daughter of cato and wife of brutus. her wealth is world-famous. famous and important men have come in from all over the world to try to marry her. the hair that hangs down on her forehead is like gold, calling every adventurer to belmont like a gold rush. antonio, if i only had enough money to hold my own against those suitors, i know i could win her!", "you know right now all my money's tied up in that cargo that's still at sea. i can't give you the cash you need because i don't have it. but go ahead and charge things to me on credit, as much credit as i can get in venice. i'll use all my lines of credit to help you get to belmont, to portia. go see who will lend money, and i'll do the same. i'm sure i can get something either as a business loan, or as a personal favor."], ["oh nerissa, my poor little body is tired of this great big world.", "you'd be tired, madam, if you had bad luck rather than wealth and good luck. but as far as i can tell, people with too much suffer as much as people with nothing. the best way to be happy is to be in between. when you have too much you get old sooner, but having just enough helps you live longer.", "good point, and well said.", "it would be better if you actually applied it to your life.", "you think it's that easy? if doing good deeds were as easy as knowing how to do them, then everyone would be better off. small chapels would be big churches, and poor men's cottages would be princes' palaces. it takes a good priest to practice what he preaches. for me, it's easier to lecture twenty people on how to be good than to be the one person out of twenty who actually does good things. the brain can tell the heart what to do, but what does it matter? cold rules don't matter when you've got a hot temper. young people are like frisky young rabbits, and good advice is like a crippled old man trying to catch them. but thinking like this won't help me choose a husband. oh, the word \"choose\" is strange! i can't choose who i like, or refuse who i dislike. i'm a living daughter still controlled by the wishes of her dead father. isn't it a pain that i can't choose or refuse anyone, nerissa?"], ["your father was an extremely moral man, and religious people get odd ideas on their deathbeds. your father's idea was to have a game with three boxes. the suitor who can figure out whether to pick the gold, silver, or lead box will solve your father's riddle and that suitor's the man for you. no one will ever choose the right box who doesn't deserve your love. but tell me. do you like any of the princely suitors who've come?", "run through the list. as you name them i'll describe them for you, and from my descriptions you can guess how i feel toward them.", "well, first there was the prince from naples.", "ah, yes, that stallion. all he talks about is his horse. he thinks it's a great credit to his character that he can shoe a horse all by himself. i'm afraid his mother may have had an affair with a blacksmith.", "then there's the count palatine.", "he does nothing but frown, as if he wants to say, \"if you don't want me, i don't care.\" he doesn't even smile when he hears funny stories. if he's so sad and solemn when he's young, i can only imagine how much he'll cry as an old man. no, i'd rather be married to a skull with a bone in its mouth than to either of those men. god protect me from these two!", "what did you think about that french lord, monsieur le bon?"], ["we might as well call him a man, since god created him. no, i know it's bad to make fun of people, but still! his horse is better than the neapolitan's and he frowns more than the count palatine. he was trying to outdo everyone so much that you couldn't tell who he was. he started dancing every time a bird sang, and he was so eager to show off his fencing that he'd fight with his own shadow. if i married him, i might as well as marry twenty husbands, because he's like twenty men all rolled into one! i'd understand it if he hated me, since even if he loved me desperately, i'd never be able to love him back.", "what about falconbridge, that young english baron?", "i have no opinion about him. we don't talk because we don't understand each other. he doesn't speak latin, french, or italian, and you know how little english i speak. he's great-looking, but how can you talk to someone who doesn't speak your language? he was dressed so oddly too! i think he got his jacket in italy, his tights in france, his hat in germany, and his behavior everywhere.", "what do you think of his neighbor, the scottish lord?", "i think he's very forgiving, since he let the englishman slap him on the ear without hitting him back. rather than defend himself, he just threatened to pay the englishman back later. then the frenchman promised to help the scot pay the englishman back, and added a slap of his own."], ["how did you like the young german, the duke of saxony's nephew?", "he's pretty awful in the morning when he's sobering up, and even worse in the afternoon when he's drunk. at his best he's a little less than a man, and at his worst he's little more than an animal. if we got married and he tragically met his demise, i'm sure i could find a way to go on without him.", "if he offers to play the game and chooses the right box, but then you reject him, you'll be disobeying your father's last wishes.", "i know. so please put a nice big glass of white wine on the wrong box. i know he'll get tempted and choose that one. i'll do anything rather than marry a drunk, nerissa.", "you don't have to worry about any of these lords, my lady. they've all told me what they want, which is to go back home and give up on you unless there was some other way to win you than your father's pick-the-box test.", "i'll die an old maid unless i can be won according to the rules set by my father's will. i'm glad these suitors are sensible enough to stay away. the only thing i like about them is that they're not there. i wish them all safe trips home.", "do you remember a venetian scholar and soldier who accompanied the marquess of montferrat here once when your father was still alive?"], ["yes, yes, that was bassanio. i think that was his name.", "yes, madam, that's the one. he deserves a beautiful wife more than all the other men i've ever seen.", "i remember him well, and my memory tells me that he deserves your praise.", "hello, do you have any news?", "the four suitors are looking for you so they can say goodbye, madam. and there's a messenger representing a fifth one, the prince of morocco, who says the prince will be here tonight.", "if i could say hello to the fifth one as happily as i'll say goodbye to the first four, i'd be very happy he's coming. if he's as good as a saint but is black like a devil, i'd rather he hear my confession than marry me. let's go, nerissa. servant go ahead. as soon as we shut the door on one suitor, another one starts knocking."], ["three thousand ducats, hmmm.", "yes, for three months.", "for three months, hmmm.", "as i said before, antonio will guarantee the loan. if i default, he'll pay you.", "antonio will guarantee it, hmmm.", "can you help me? what's your answer?", "three thousand ducats for three months, and antonio will guarantee it.", "your answer?", "antonio's a good man.", "have you heard anything to the contrary?", "what? no, no, no, no. what i meant in saying he's a good man is that he has enough money to guarantee the loan. but his investments are uncertain right now. he has one ship bound for tripoli, another heading for the indies. what's more, people at the tell me he has a third ship in mexico, and a fourth in england, as well as other business ventures throughout the world."], ["but ships are just fragile boards, and sailors are just men. there are rats and thieves and pirates not to mention storms, winds, and rocks. anything could happen. but in spite of all this, the man is still wealthy enough. three thousand ducats i think i can let him guarantee your loan.", "i assure you he can.", "i be sure he can, before i make the loan. and i'll think of a way to be sure. can i speak with antonio?", "if you like, you can dine with us.", "oh yes to smell ? i don't think so!. your prophet jesus sent the devil into a herd of pigs. i'm not going to eat that. i'll buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so on, but i won't eat with you, drink with you, or pray with you. any news on the rialto? who's that?", "this is signor antonio.", "he looks just like a guy who's robbed me but now comes to beg me for a favor! i hate him because he's a christian. but more than that, i hate him because he stupidly lends money without interest, which lowers the interest rates here in venice. if i can just get the upper hand of him once, i'll satisfy my old grudge against him. he hates jews. even at the rialto he's always complaining about me and my negotiating and my hard-earned profits, which he calls \"interest.\""], ["it would an insult to jews everywhere to forgive that man!", "shylock, are you listening?", "i'm thinking about how much cash i have on hand. if i remember correctly, i can't raise the entire three thousand ducats immediately. but so what? tubal, a wealthy jew i know, will supply me with the cash. but wait a minute! how many months do you want? antonio oh, hello, how are you, signor? we were just talking about you.", "shylock, although i never lend or borrow with interest, i'm willing to break that habit to help a friend in need. bassanio does he know how much you need?", "oh yes, three thousand ducats.", "for three months.", "yes, i forgot three months. bassanio you told me that. antonio now then, about your guarantee. let me see but listen, antonio, i thought you said you don't lend or borrow with interest."], ["that's right. that's not how i do business.", "when jacob took care of his uncle laban's sheep jacob was the heir to his grandfather abraham's birthright, because his mother cleverly arranged for her husband isaac to make jacob his heir", "what's your point? did he charge interest?", "no, he didn't not in your sense of the word. but listen to what jacob did. when he and laban agreed that all the spotted lambs would be jacob's pay, it was the end of autumn, when the sheep were starting to mate. because newborns look like whatever their mother sees during mating, he stuck some spotted branches into the ground right in front of the sheep, who saw them while they mated. the mothers later gave birth to spotted lambs, all of which went to jacob. that was his way of expanding his business, and it worked. my point is that profit is a blessing, as long as you don't steal to get it.", "that business venture you're referring to happened because god made it happen like that. jacob didn't have any control over what happened. are you saying this story proves that charging interest makes sense? that your interest payments are like jacob's sheep?", "i can hardly tell the difference; i make my money multiply as fast as those sheep. but listen to me, signor"], ["watch out, bassanio. the devil can quote scripture for his own use. an evil soul using a holy story is like a criminal who smiles at you. he looks like a good apple but he's rotten at the core. oh, liars can look so honest!", "three thousand ducats. that's a nice even sum. three months from twelve months of the year. let me see. the interest rate will be", "well, shylock? are you going to loan us the money?", "signor antonio, you've often insulted my money and my business practices in the rialto. i have always just shrugged and put up with it because jews are good at suffering. you called me a heathen, a dirty dog, and you spit on my jewish clothes. and all because i use my own money to make a profit. and now it looks like you need my help. all right then. you come to me saying, \"shylock, we need money.\" you say that! even though you spat on my beard and kicked me like you'd kick a stray mutt out your front door. and now you're asking for money. what can i tell you? shouldn't i say, \"does a dog have money? is it possible for a mutt to lend three thousand ducats?\" or should i bend down low, and in a humble and submissive voice say:"], ["\"sir, last wednesday you spit on me. you insulted me on this day, and another time you called me a dog. and out of gratitude for these favors, i'll be happy to lend you the money?\"", "i'll probably call you those names again and spit on you, and reject you again too. if you're going to lend us this money, don't lend it to us as if we were your friends. when did friends charge interest? instead, lend it to me as your enemy. if your enemy goes bankrupt, it's easier for you to take your penalty from him.", "look at you getting all riled up! i want to be friends with you, and forget all the times you've embarrassed and humiliated me. i want to give you what you need, and not charge a penny of interest but you won't listen to me! i'm making a kind offer zero percent financing.", "that really would be kind.", "i'll show you how kind i am. come with me to a notary and we'll make it official. and let's add a little clause just for a joke. if you don't repay me on the day we agree on, in the place we name, for the sum of money fixed in our contract, your penalty will be a pound of your pretty flesh, to be cut off and taken out of whatever part of your body i like.", "it's a deal. i'll agree to those terms and even say that jews are nice."], ["no, you can't sign a contract like that for me! i'd rather go without the money.", "don't worry about it, man, i won't have to pay any penalty. in two months a month before this loan is due i expect to earn more than three times that much from my investments.", "oh father abraham, what kind of people are these christians? their own meanness teaches them to suspect other people! please tell me this. if he fails to repay me by the deadline, what would i get out of such a penalty? a pound of human flesh taken isn't even as valuable as a pound of mutton or beef. i'm just offering this as a favor to a friend. if he agrees, great. if not, goodbye. and i hope you won't think badly of me.", "yes, shylock, i'll sign the contract and agree to its terms.", "then meet me right away at the notary's. give him the instructions for our amusing little contract, and i'll go get the money for you right away. i need to check in at home first, because one of my careless servants is in charge right now. i'll see you soon.", "hurry up, my jewish friend.", "he's so kind you'd think the jew is turning christian."], ["i don't like it when a villain acts nice.", "come on, there's no reason to worry. my ships will come home a month before the money is due."], ["don't hold my skin color against me. i was born and raised in the sun, which is why i'm dark-skinned. but i'm as red-blooded as any man. show me the best-looking person born in the freezing north, where the sun barely thaws the icicles. i'll win your love by cutting myself to prove to you i have redder blood than he does. i'm telling you, madam, my skin color has made brave men fear me and moroccan girls love me. i wouldn't change it except to make you think of me, my darling queen.", "being good-looking isn't the only way to my heart, you know. i have other criteria for choosing a husband. not that it matters, because the box test takes away my free choice anyway. but if my father hadn't restricted me like this forcing me to marry whoever wins his test then you'd have had as good a chance to marry me as any of the suitors i've met so far, prince."], ["thank you for saying that. show me the caskets and let me try my luck. i swear by my sword, which killed the shah of persia and a persian prince and defeated the sultan suleiman three times, that i would face the meanest-looking warriors on earth. i would act braver than the bravest man on earth. i would grab bear cubs from a ferocious mother bear, or tease a hungry lion all of this in order to win your love, lady. but this is bad! if the hero hercules and his servant lychas rolled the dice, which would win? not the greater hero. just the one who happened to be luckier that time. and just as hercules could be beaten by his servant, blind luck could make me lose this test and make someone worse than me win. if that happened, i'd die of sadness.", "you have to take your chances. either don't choose at all, or swear beforehand that if you choose incorrectly you'll never talk about marriage to any woman again. think about it carefully.", "fine, i swear i won't ever get married if i choose incorrectly. let me take my chances.", "let's go to the temple first. you can take your chances after dinner.", "i'll try my luck then. i'll either be the luckiest or the unluckiest man alive."], ["i'm sure i'll feel guilty if i run away from this jew, my master. the devil's on my shoulder, tempting me. he's saying, \"gobbo,\" \"launcelot gobbo,\" \"good launcelot,\" or \"good gobbo,\" or \"good launcelot gobbo\" \"use your legs and run away.\" but my conscience says, \"no, launcelot, calm down, don't run away.\" the devil's urging me to leave. \"go away!\" he says. \"run away! be tough,\" says the devil, \"and run!\" but then my conscience, hanging around my heart, says very wisely to me, \"my good friend launcelot, you're a good boy, the son of an honest man,\" really, that should be the son of an honest woman, since my father cheated on my mother. anyway, my conscience says, \"stay put.\" \"go,\" the devil says. \"don't go,\" says my conscience. \"conscience,\" i say, \"you give good advice.\" \"devil,\" i say, \"you give good advice.\" if i listened to my conscience, i'd stay with the jew my master, who's a devil. but if i ran away from the jew, i'd be following the advice of the devil, who's the very devil himself. certainly the jew is the devil incarnate, and my conscience is giving me a hard time by telling me to stay with the jew. the devil's advice is nicer. i'll run, devil. tell me to run, and i'll run."], ["excuse me, young man, how do i get to the jew's residence?", "good heavens, it's my father. he doesn't recognize me because he's half-blind or more than half-blind, somewhere between half-blind and totally blind. i'll play a little game with him.", "young man, excuse me, how do i get to the jew's?", "turn right at the next turn, but at the following turn, turn left. oh, and then at the very next turn, don't turn left or right, but turn down and around to the jew's house.", "good heavens, those are difficult directions. can you tell me if a man named launcelot, who lives with him, is still there?", "are you talking about young master launcelot? watch out, i'm going to pull a good prank here. is that who you're talking about?", "he's not a \"master,\" sir, he's just a poor man's son. his father, if i do say so myself, is an honest but very poor man, and, thank god, likely to live a long time.", "well, his father can be whatever he wants to be. we're talking about young master launcelot.", "please don't call him that, sir. he's just launcelot."], ["but excuse me, , old man, , i'm asking you if you're talking about young master launcelot.", "yes, i'm talking about launcelot, sir.", ", master launcelot. but please don't talk about master launcelot, old man. the young gentleman, submitting to the fates, the three sisters who control destiny, and other branches of learning like that, is deceased. or, to put it in plain language, he's gone to heaven.", "oh, no. god forbid! the boy was going to support me in my old age!", "what am i, a cane? how could i support anyone? don't you recognize me, father?", "heaven help me, i don't know you, sir. but please tell me, is my boy god rest his soul alive or dead?", "you really don't recognize me, father?", "sir, i'm half-blind. i don't know you.", "even if you had your eyes, you still might not recognize me. it takes a wise father to know his own child. well, old man, i'll tell you news of your son. give me your blessing. the truth will come to light, and murder can't be hidden long a man's son may hide, but truth will always come out."], ["please stand up! i'm sure you aren't launcelot, my boy.", "come on, quit fooling around. give me your blessing. i'm launcelot, who was your boy, is your son, and will be your child.", "i can't believe you're my son.", "i don't know what to say to that, but the fact is i'm launcelot, the jew's servant, and margery, your wife, is my mother.", "yes, you're right, her name is margery. if you're launcelot, then you're my own flesh and blood. launcelot my lord, what a bushy beard you have! you've got more hair on your chin than dobbin my horse has in his tail.", "then dobbin's tail must be growing backward. i'm sure he had more hair on his tail than i have on my face when i last saw him.", "lord, how you've changed! how are you and your master getting along? i've brought him a present. how are you?", "i'm all right. but i've decided to run away, and i can't wait to get going. my master's a total jew. you're giving him a present? give him a noose to hang himself. he's starving me to death. you can see my ribs so well you can count them. i'm glad you've come, father. give me your present to give to master bassanio. he gives his servants beautiful new uniforms."], ["if i can't get a job with him, i'll run away to the ends of the earth. oh look, this is lucky, here comes master bassanio now. let's go talk to him, father. if i work for the any longer, you can just call me a jew.", "all right, go ahead. but do everything quickly. supper must be ready at five at the latest. make sure these letters get delivered, get the uniforms made, and tell gratiano to come visit me soon.", "go talk to him, father.", "bassanio god bless you, sir!", "thank you. what do you want with me?", "this is my son, sir. he's a poor boy", "not a poor boy, but the rich jew's servant, who wants, as my father will explain", "he wants very much, sir, as one might say, to work for", "to put it briefly, i work for the jew, and i want, as my father will tell you"], ["he and his master aren't exactly friends", "to be brief, the truth is that the jew has done me wrong, and that forces me to as my father, an old man, will inform you", "i have a present i'd like to give you, sir. and i want to request that", "to make a long story short, the request is about me, as this good old man will tell you. even though i'm his son and i'm the one saying it, this old man is a poor man", "one of you do the talking. what do you want?", "to work for you, sir.", "that's what we're trying to say, sir.", "i know who you are. you can have what you want. i spoke with your master shylock today, and he recommended you to me. if you want to leave a rich jew to work for a poor gentleman, you're welcome to.", "do you know the old proverb \"the grace of god is enough,\" sir? it could be divided between you and my boss shylock you have \"the grace of god,\" and he has \"enough.\"", "nicely put. go with your son, old man. say goodbye to your old master and find your way to my house. give him a uniform that's a little nicer than the others. make sure it gets done."], ["father, go ahead. i can't get a job, can i? i can't talk well, no. if any man in italy has a palm good enough to swear on a bible with, it's me. i've got very good luck! here's my life line. it shows a few wives fifteen wives is nothing. eleven widows and nine maids is a humble beginning for one man. it seems i'll almost drown three times, and my life will be in danger when i'm caught in bed with another man's wife! but these little lines are the escape routes i can take to get out of that one. if luck's a lady, she's good at this business. father, let's go. i'll leave the jew behind in the blink of an eye.", "bassanio please, leonardo, think about this these things have been bought and are ready. hurry back here. i'm having dinner tonight with someone i greatly respect. go now.", "i'll do my best.", "leonardo where's your master?", "he's walking over there, sir."], ["signor bassanio!", "gratiano!", "i have a favor to ask.", "anything.", "don't say no. let me go with you to belmont.", "well, if you have to go, you have to go. but listen to me, gratiano. sometimes you get a bit too wild, and you let your voice get a bit loud and rude. these things look good on you, of course, and to people like you and me there's nothing wrong with it. but in places where people don't know you, your behavior might seem too wild. please, try to act a little more serious, or the people in belmont will get the wrong impression about me, and your wildness will make me blow my chance with portia.", "listen, signor bassanio, there's nothing to worry about. i'll be solemn-looking, i'll talk with respect, and i'll only swear once in a while. i'll carry prayer books in my pocket and look sweet even more. while grace is being said, i'll be modest and say \"amen\" i'll watch my manners as if i'm trying to please my grandma. if i don't do all this, never trust me again.", "well, we'll see how you act.", "okay, but tonight doesn't count. you can't judge me based on what i do tonight."], ["no, it'd be a shame for you to act serious tonight. i'd rather see you having fun, because we have friends coming who want to have fun. anyway, i have to say goodbye to you now. i've got some business to take care of.", "i have to join lorenzo and the others, but we'll visit you at supper time."], ["i'm sorry you're leaving my father like this. it's hell in our house, and you helped cheer it up, like a funny devil. but goodbye. here's a ducat for you. you'll soon be meeting lorenzo at supper; he'll be a guest of your new master. give him this letter. launcelot do it secretly. goodbye. i don't want my father to see me talking to you.", "goodbye. my tears show you my feelings, my beautiful pagan, my sweet jew! i'm sure some christian will resort to trickery to get you. but goodbye. it's not manly to cry. goodbye.", "goodbye, launcelot.", "oh god, what a heinous sinner i am, being ashamed to be my father's child! but i need to remember i'm related to him by blood, not behavior. oh lorenzo, if you keep your promise to me, i'll end this agony by becoming a christian and marrying you."], ["no, we'll sneak away at supper time, disguise ourselves with masks at my house, and come back in an hour.", "but we haven't made any preparations.", "we haven't even talked about who'll be our torchbearers.", "the masquerade party might turn out terribly if we don't manage things carefully. i think it's better to call it off.", "it's only four o'clock now. we have two hours to get ready.", "launcelot, what's going on?", "lorenzo if you don't mind opening this letter, you can find out for yourself.", "i recognize the handwriting. it's beautiful handwriting. and the beautiful hand that wrote this letter is whiter than the paper it's written on.", "i bet it's a love letter!", "lorenzo may i be excused, sir?"], ["where are you going?", "to invite my former boss, the jew, to dine tonight with my new master, the christian.", "launcelot hold on, take this. tell jessica i won't fail her. tell her in private. go, gentlemen, get ready for the masquerade tonight. i have someone who can be my torchbearer.", "all right, i'll go get things ready.", "me too.", "meet me and gratiano at his house in about an hour.", "it's good we're doing this.", "wasn't that letter from jessica?"], ["i have to tell you everything. she's told me how i can get her out of her father's house. she's also told me what gold and jewels she owns, and she's described the uniform she's keeping to wear as a disguise. if her father ever goes to heaven, it'll be because his daughter's so good. she'll never be punished with bad luck unless it's because her father is an unbelieving jew. come with me. gratiano you can look this letter over as you go. beautiful jessica will be my torchbearer."], ["well, you'll see it with your own eyes. you'll see the difference between working for shylock and working for bassanio. jessica! you won't eat like a pig like you used to do at my place. jessica! and sleep, and snore, and wear your clothes out. jessica, i'm calling you!", "jessica!", "who asked you to call her? i'm not asking you to call her.", "you always loved to tell me i couldn't do anything without being told.", "did you call me? do you need something?", "i've been invited to supper, jessica. here are my keys. but why should i go? i wasn't invited because they like me. they're just flattering me. but i'll go out of spite, to feed off the wasteful christian. jessica, my girl, watch the house. i don't feel like going. things aren't going my way right now. i know because i dreamed of money bags last night."], ["please go, sir. my new master is expecting your approach.", "and i'm expecting his reproach.", "and they've been plotting things together. i'm not saying you'll get a masquerade party, but if you do, i predicted it. i knew there would be a masquerade when i got that bad omen of a bloody nose last easter monday, at six in the morning, four years after i got the same kind of bloody nose on ash wednesday, in the afternoon.", "what, there's going to be a masquerade? listen to me, jessica, lock my doors up, and when you hear the drum and the nasty squealing of the flute, don't climb up to the windows. don't stick your head out into the public street to stare at the christian fools with painted faces. block up my house's ears i mean the windows. don't let the noise of shallow fools enter my serious house. i swear, i'm in no mood to go out to dinner tonight, but i'll go anyway. launcelot, go tell them i'll come.", "i'll go ahead of you, sir. jessica mistress, be on the lookout when you're staring out the window. a christian's coming who'll be worth a jewess's glance."], ["what did that gentile fool say to you, hmmm?", "he said \"goodbye, madam,\" and nothing else.", "the fool's nice enough, but he's such a huge eater, and slow as a snail when he works. he sleeps all day like a cat. bees that don't work can't stay in my hive, so i'm letting him go, handing him off so he can waste money for his new boss, the man who borrowed money from me. anyway, jessica, go inside. i might come back soon. do as i told you. shut the doors after you. as the saying goes, lock things up, and you'll get to keep them.", "goodbye. if luck's with me, i'll lose a father, and you'll lose a daughter."], ["this is the roof under which lorenzo said to meet him.", "he's late.", "yes, and that's surprising, because lovers are usually early.", "yes, for new lovers time passes ten times faster than for couples who've been married forever.", "that's always true. who gets up from a meal with the same appetite he had when he sat down? can any horse retrace his footsteps with the same energy he had when he walked them the first time? we chase everything in life more excitedly than we actually enjoy it when we get it. it's like when a ship sails out of the harbor with all its flags waving, gently pushed by the wind. when that ship returns, her timber is all weather-beaten and her sails are ragged. that same wind makes the ship thin and poor.", "here comes lorenzo. we'll talk about this later."], ["my dear friends, thanks for your patience. i had business that made me late. when you have to steal your own wives some day, i'll wait for you just as long. come over here. my future father-in-law, the jew, lives here. hey! who's in there?", "who are you? tell me so i can be sure, though i swear i recognize your voice.", "i'm lorenzo, your love.", "lorenzo, that's for sure, and i'm also sure you're my love who else do i love so much? and now who but you knows whether i'm yours?", "as god is my witness, you know you're mine.", "here, catch this box. it'll be worth your while. i'm glad it's nighttime and you can't see me. i'm ashamed of my disguise. but love is blind, and lovers can't see the silly things they do around each other. if they could, cupid himself would be embarassed to see me dressed up as a boy.", "come down here. you have to be my torchbearer for the masquerade.", "what, i have to hold a candle up so people can see what i'm doing? the truth is, i'm behaving like a loose woman. the torchbearer is supposed to bring light and love, but i should be hidden away in the dark."], ["you're hidden away, sweetheart, dressed up like a boy. come on quickly. time flies at night, and we're late for bassanio's feast.", "i'll lock up the doors, grab some more ducats, and be with you right away.", "my god, she can't be a jew, she's too nice!", "god, i'm crazy about her. she's wise, if i'm judging her right. she's beautiful, if my eyes can see. and she's loyal, as she has proven. and as long as she's herself wise, beautiful, and faithful she'll always have a place in my heart.", "ah, you're here? come on, gentlemen, let's go! our masquerade mates are waiting for us.", "who's there?", "signor antonio?"], ["gratiano, where is everybody? it's nine o'clock! our friends are all waiting for you. there's no masquerade tonight. the wind is blowing right, so bassanio's going onboard immediately. i've sent twenty people to look for you.", "i'm glad. i want to head out tonight."], ["go open the curtains and show the different boxes to the prince.", "", "morocco now make your choice.", "the first one, the gold one, has an inscription that says, \"he who chooses me will get what many men want.\" the second one, the silver one, says, \"he who chooses me will get what he deserves.\" and this third one is made of dull lead. it has a blunt warning that says, \"he who chooses me must give and risk all he has.\" how will i know if i chose the right one?", "one of them contains my picture. if you choose that one, i'm yours, along with the picture.", "i wish some god could help me choose! let me see. i'll look over the inscriptions again. what does the lead box say? \"he who chooses me must give and risk all he has.\" must give everything for what? for lead? risk everything for lead? this box is too threatening. men who risk everything hope to make profits. a golden mind doesn't bend down to choose something worthless. so i won't give or risk anything for lead. what does the silver one say?"], ["\"he who chooses me will get as much as he deserves.\" as much as he deserves wait a minute there, morocco, and consider your own value with a level head. if your reputation is trustworthy, you deserve a lot though maybe not enough to include this lady. but fearing i don't deserve her is a way of underestimating myself. as much as i deserve i deserve portia! by birth i deserve her. in terms of wealth, talents, and upbringing, and especially love, i deserve her. what if i went no further and chose this one? but let's see once more what the gold one says: \"he who chooses me will get what many men want.\" that's portia! the whole world wants her. they come from the four corners of the earth to kiss this shrine and see this living, breathing saint. princes travel across deserts and the vast wilderness of arabia to come see the beautiful portia. the wide ocean doesn't prevent them from coming to see her they travel across it as if it were a little stream. one of these three boxes contains her lovely picture. could the lead one contain it? no, it'd be a sin to think such a low thought. lead's too crass to hold her. is she enclosed in silver, which is ten times less valuable than gold? oh, what a sinful thought! nobody ever set a gem like her in a worse setting than gold. they have a coin in england stamped with the figure of an angel, but that's just engraved on the surface."], ["here an angel's lying in a golden bed. give me the key. i will choose this one and try my chances.", "there, take it, prince. and if my picture's in there, then i'm yours.", "damn it! what's this? it's a skull with a scroll in its empty eye socket. i'll read it aloud. \"all that glitters is not gold you've often heard that said. many men have sold their souls just to view my shiny surface. but gilded tombs contain worms. if you'd been as wise as you were bold, with an old man's mature judgment, you wouldn't have had to read this scroll. so goodbye you lost your chance.\" lost my chance indeed! so goodbye hope, and hello despair. portia, goodbye to you. my heart's too sad for long goodbyes. losers always leave quickly.", "good riddance! close the curtains and leave. i hope everyone who looks like him will make the same choice."], ["i saw bassanio sail away, and gratiano went with him. i'm sure lorenzo isn't on their ship.", "that wicked jew got the duke to listen to his complaints. the duke went with him to search bassanio's ship.", "he got there too late. the ship was already sailing. but once he got there, the duke learned that lorenzo and his lover jessica were together in a gondola. in any case, antonio assured the duke they weren't with bassanio on his ship.", "i've never heard such confused emotions as what that jew dog was shouting in the streets. \"my daughter, oh my ducats, oh my daughter! ran off with a christian! oh my christian ducats! justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter, a sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats, of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter, and jewels two stones, two rich and precious stones stolen by my daughter! justice, find the girl! she has the stones on her, and the ducats.\"", "i know, all the boys in venice are following him, yelling, \"his stones, his daughter, and his ducats!\""], ["i hope antonio repays his loan on time, or he'll suffer for this.", "that's a good point. i spoke with a frenchman yesterday who said that a venetian ship loaded with treasure was wrecked in the english channel. i thought about antonio when he told me. i silently hoped it wasn't his ship.", "you should tell antonio what you hear but don't do it suddenly, because it might upset him.", "there's no nicer guy in the whole world. i saw bassanio and antonio say goodbye. bassanio told him he'd try to hurry back. antonio answered \"don't rush. don't do a sloppy job for my sake, bassanio. stay until everything is finished. as for the jew's contract, don't let it be a factor in your plans. be happy and concentrate your thoughts on love and how to win your love.\" then his eyes started tearing up. he turned his face away. then he shook bassanio's hand affectionately and they separated."], ["i think he only loves life because of bassanio. let's go find him and cheer him up.", "yes, let's do that."], ["hurry, hurry, close the curtain quick. the prince of arragon has taken his oath, and he's coming to make his choice now.", "look, here are the boxes, prince. if you choose the one that contains my picture, we'll be married right away. but if you fail, you have to leave immediately. no pleas will be allowed.", "i swore i'd do three things. first, i can never tell anyone what box i choose. second, if i choose the wrong box, i'll never propose marriage for the rest of my life. third, if i pick the wrong box, i'll leave immediately.", "everyone who comes to gamble on winning me has to swear to these three rules.", "okay, i'm ready. i hope luck will give me what my heart hopes for! gold, silver, and common lead. \"he who chooses me must give and risk all he has.\" you'd have to be more attractive for me to give or risk anything for you. what does the golden box say? hmm, let me see:"], ["\"he who chooses me will get what many men want.\" what many men want that \"many\" could mean that most people are fools and choose by whatever is flashy. they don't go beyond what their eyes see. they don't bother to find out what's on the inside. just like those birds called martins who build their nests on the outside of walls, people pay too much attention to what's on the outside. so i won't choose what many men desire, because i won't jump on the bandwagon and include myself with the whole crude population. so i guess it's you, you silver treasure house. tell me once more what you say. \"he who chooses me will get what he deserves.\" that's nicely put because who's going to cheat luck and get more than he deserves? no one should have an honor he doesn't deserve. oh, wouldn't it be great if property, rank, official positions, and other honors were earned only by merit, not by corruption? there wouldn't be too many important men then. how many people who are humble now would be great then? how many people who give orders now would have to take orders? how many noblemen would be weeded out and would become peasants? and how many common people would suddenly shine with nobility? well, let me get back to my choice. \"he who chooses me will get what he deserves.\" i'll assume i deserve the very best. give me a key for this one. i'll unlock my fate here in a second.", "you thought about it too long, considering what you found there."], ["what's this? a picture of an idiot holding a scroll up for me to read! i'll read it. it looks so unlike portia! this outcome isn't what i hoped for, or what i deserve. \"the one who chooses me will get what he deserves\"! didn't i deserve anything more than a fool's head? is this my prize? don't i deserve more than this?", "judging what you deserve is one thing. offending you is something very different, so i'll keep my mouth shut.", "what does this say? \"this box was tested in the fire seven times. the person who never makes a wrong choice has wisdom that will stand the test. some people kiss shadows. they only feel the shadow of joy. there are fools out there with silver hair and silver coins. this choice was as foolish as they are. take whatever wife you want to bed with you, you'll have a fool's head forever. so go away. you're done here.\" the longer i stay, the more foolish i look. i came here with a fool's head on my shoulders and now i'm leaving with two. goodbye, sweet lady. i'll keep my oath and patiently suffer through my anger."], ["these men are like moths, drawn to these boxes as if they were flames. this is how the candle burned the moth. oh, these fools! when they choose, they only know how to lose.", "you know what they say. destiny chooses when you'll die and who you'll marry.", "come on, close the curtain, nerissa.", "where's lady portia?", "here. how can i help you, sir?", "madam, a young venetian man has arrived to tell us his master is about to arrive. this lord has sent gifts. besides his nice polite greetings, his gifts are expensive. i haven't seen such a promising candidate for your love. this servant has arrived before his master the way a sweet spring day hints about a lush summer. but there's never been an april day as promising as this.", "please don't tell me any more. i'm almost afraid you're going to tell me he's a relative of yours, because you're going so crazy praising him. come on, nerissa, i want to go see this man who's come so courteously.", "i hope it's bassanio coming to win portia!"], ["so, what's the news on the rialto?", "well, there's a rumor that antonio had a ship carrying expensive cargo that shipwrecked in the english channel on the goodwin sands, a very dangerous sandbar. many ships have sunk there, according to rumors.", "i hope this new rumor is a lie, like the gossiping widow's claim that she was sorry her third husband died! but it's true i don't want to get all mushy and go on and on, but the good antonio, the honest antonio oh, if i only had a title good enough to match his!", "come on, get to the point.", "what are you saying? well, the point is, he's lost a ship.", "i hope that's all he loses.", "let me say \"amen\" quickly, before the devil comes in and stops my prayer because here comes the devil, disguised as a jew."], ["how's it going, shylock? what's the news among the merchants?", "you knew no one knew, no one knew as well as you did about my daughter's plans to run away.", "that's true. i even knew the tailor who made the disguise she wore when she ran off.", "and shylock knew his daughter was ready to run away. it's natural for children to leave their parents.", "she'll be damned for it.", "that's true if the devil's judging her.", "my own flesh and blood turned against me! a rebel!", "no! your at your age?", "i mean my daughter is my flesh and blood.", "you two are totally different. your flesh is more different from hers than coal is from ivory. there's more difference between your bloods than between red wine and white. but tell us, did you hear anything about antonio's loss at sea?"], ["that's another bad deal i've made! a bankrupt, a spendthrift, who now has to hide his head on the rialto, a beggar who used to look so smug in front of the other merchants. let him think about his own debt. he liked to call me a loan shark; let him think about his debt to me. he used to lend money as a favor between christians; but now, let him think about his own debt.", "but you won't take his flesh if he can't pay. what's that good for?", "i'll use it for fish bait. you can't eat human flesh, but if it feeds nothing else, it'll feed my revenge. he's insulted me and cost me half a million ducats. he's laughed at my losses, made fun of my earnings, humiliated my race, thwarted my deals, turned my friends against me, riled up my enemies and why? because i'm a jew. doesn't a jew have eyes? doesn't a jew have hands, bodily organs, a human shape, five senses, feelings, and passions? doesn't a jew eat the same food, get hurt with the same weapons, get sick with the same diseases, get healed by the same medicine, and warm up in summer and cool off in winter just like a christian? if you prick us with a pin, don't we bleed? if you tickle us, don't we laugh? if you poison us, don't we die? and if you treat us badly, won't we try to get revenge? if we're like you in everything else, we'll resemble you in that respect. if a jew offends a christian, what's the christian's kind and gentle reaction? revenge. if a christian offends a jew, what punishment will he come up with if he follows the christian example? of course, the same thing revenge! i'll treat you as badly as you christians taught me to and you'll be lucky if i don't outdo my teachers."], ["solanio salarino my master antonio is at his house and would like to speak to you both.", "we've been looking for him everywhere.", "here comes another jew. you couldn't find a third like these two unless the devil himself turned into a jew.", "hello, tubal. any news from genoa? did you find my daughter?", "i went to many places where i heard news about her, but i couldn't find her.", "oh, oh, oh! one of the stolen diamonds cost me two thousand ducats in frankfurt! i never felt the curse of the jews until now. i never felt it until now two thousand ducats in that diamond, and other precious, precious jewels! i wish my daughter were dead at my feet wearing those jewels! i wish she were in her coffin here, with the ducats in her coffin! you couldn't find out anything about them? why? i don't even know how much i'm spending to find them. loss upon loss! the thief left with so much, and i'm spending so much to hunt down the thief and still i'm not satisfied! i haven't gotten my revenge. the only luck i have is bad luck. nobody suffers but me. nobody's crying except me."], ["well, other men have bad luck too. antonio, as i heard in genoa", "what, what, what? bad luck, bad luck?", "he's had a ship wrecked coming from tripolis.", "thank god, thank god! is it true, is it true?", "i spoke with some of the sailors who survived the wreck.", "thank you, tubal. good news, good news! ha, ha, heard in genoa.", "i also heard that your daughter spent eighty ducats in genoa one night.", "oh, you're sticking a dagger in me! i'll never see my gold again. eighty ducats in one shot! eighty ducats!", "i came to venice with a number of antonio's creditors who say he won't be able to avoid going bankrupt.", "i'm very glad about that. i'll hound him. i'll torture him. i'm very glad.", "one creditor showed me a ring he got from your daughter in exchange for a monkey.", "damn her! you're torturing me, tubal. that was my turquoise ring! leah gave it to me before we were married. i wouldn't have given it away for a whole jungle of monkeys."], ["but antonio's certainly ruined.", "that's true, that's very true. tubal, go find me a police officer to arrest antonio. get him ready two weeks ahead of time. i'll take antonio's heart if he can't pay. with him out of venice, i can make whatever bargains i want when i lend money. go, tubal. meet me at the synagogue."], ["bassanio please wait a day or two before making your choice. if you choose wrong, i'll lose your company. so wait a while. something tells me not love, but something that i don't want to lose you, and you know that if i hated you i wouldn't think that. but let me put it more clearly in case you don't understand though i know girls aren't supposed to express their thoughts i'm just saying i'd like you to stay here for a month or two before you undergo the test for me. i could tell you how to choose correctly, but then i'd be disregarding the oath i took. so i'll never tell. but you might lose me by making the wrong choice. if you do choose wrong, you'll make me wish for something very bad. i'd wish i had ignored my oath and told you everything. god, your eyes have bewitched me. they've divided me in two. one half of me is yours, and the other half my own half, i'd call it belongs to you too. if it's mine, then it's yours, and so i'm all yours. but in this awful day and age people don't even have the right to their own property! so though i'm yours, i'm not yours. if there's no chance for me to be yours, then it's just bad luck. i know i'm talking too much, but i do that just to make the time last longer, and to postpone your test.", "let me choose now. i feel tortured by all this talking.", "tortured, ? then confess to your crime. tell us about the treason you've mixed in with your love."], ["the only treason i'm guilty of is worrying that i'm never going to get to enjoy you. treason has nothing at all to do with my love. they're as opposite as hot and cold.", "hmmm, i'm not sure i believe what you're saying. men under torture will confess anything.", "promise me you'll let me live, and i'll confess the truth.", "all right then, confess and live.", "\"confess and love\" is more like it. oh, torture's fun when my torturer tells me what i have to say to go free! but let me try my luck on the boxes.", "go ahead, then. i'm locked in one of them. if you really love me, you'll find me. nerissa and the rest of you, get away from him. play some music while he chooses. then if he loses, it'll be his swan song, music before the end. and since swans need water to swim in, i'll cry him a river when he loses. but on the other hand, he may win. what music should we play then? if he wins, the music should be like the majestic trumpets that blare when subjects bow to a newly crowned monarch. it's the sweet sounds at daybreak that the dreaming bridegroom hears on his wedding morning, calling him to the church."], ["bassanio's walking to the boxes now. he looks as dignified as hercules did when he saved the princess hesione from the sea monster. but he loves me more than hercules loved the princess. i'll play hesione, and everyone else will be the bystanders watching with tear-streaked faces. we've all come out to see what will happen. go, hercules! if you survive, i'll live. i'm more anxious watching you fight than you are in the fight itself.", "", "answer me, answer me.", "", "ding, dong, bell."], ["you can't always judge a book by its cover. people are often tricked by false appearances. in court, someone can deliver a false plea but hide its wickedness with a pretty voice. in religion, don't serious men defend sins with scripture, covering up evil with a show of good. every sin in the world manages to make itself look good somehow. how many people are cowards at heart but wear beards like hercules or mars, the god of war? take another example: beauty. it can be bought by the ounce in makeup, which works miracles. women who wear it the most are respected the least. it's the same thing with hair. curly golden hair moves so nicely in the wind and makes a woman beautiful. but you can buy that kind of hair as a wig, and wigs are made from dead people's hair. decoration's nothing but a danger, meant to trick and trap the viewer. a lovely, cunning shore can distract a man from the perils of a stormy sea, just as a pretty scarf can hide a dangerous dark-skinned beauty. nowadays, everyone's fooled by appearances. so i'll have nothing to do with that gaudy gold box it's like the gold that midas couldn't eat. and i'll have nothing to do with the pale silver either, the metal that common coins are made of. but this humble lead one, though it looks too threatening to promise me anything good, moves me more than i can say. so this is the one i choose. i hope i'm happy with my choice!"], ["all my other emotions are vanishing into thin air, as all my doubts and desperation and fears and jealousy are all flying away! oh, i need to calm down, make my love and my joy less intense. i'm feeling this too strongly. please make my love less, or i'm going to overindulge, making myself sick.", "what do we have here? a picture of beautiful portia! what artist captured her likeness so well? are these eyes moving? or do they just seem to move as my eyes move? her sweet breath forces her lips open, a lovely divider of lovely lips. and look at her hair, looking like a golden mesh to trap the hearts of men, like little flies in a cobweb. the painter was like a spider in creating it so delicately. but her eyes how could he keep looking at them long enough to paint them? i would've expected that when he finished one of them, it would have enraptured him and kept him from painting the other. but i'm giving only faint praise of the picture, just as the picture, as good as it is, is only a faint imitation of the real woman herself. here's the scroll that sums up my fate: \"you who don't judge by looks alone, have better luck, and make the right choice. since this prize is yours, be happy with it, and don't look for a new one. if you're happy with what you've won and accept this prize as your blissful destiny, then turn to where your lady is, and claim her with a loving kiss.\""], ["a nice message. my lady, with your permission, this note authorizes me to give myself to you with a kiss. but i'm in a daze, like someone who's just won a contest and thinks that all the applause and cheering is for him, but isn't sure yet. and so, beautiful lady, i'm standing here just like that, wondering whether all this can be true until you tell me it is.", "you see me standing here, lord bassanio. what you see is what you get. though i wouldn't wish to be better for my own sake, for your sake i wish i were twenty times more than myself a thousand times more beautiful and ten thousand times richer just so you might value me more, so my good qualities, beauty, possessions, and friends would be more than you could calculate. what you're getting is an innocent and inexperienced girl. i'm happy that at least i'm not too old to learn new things. i'm even happier that i'm not stupid, and i can learn. i'm happiest of all that i'm yours now, my lord, my king, and you can guide me as you wish. everything i am and everything i have now belongs to you. just a minute ago i was the owner of this beautiful mansion, master of these servants, and queen over myself. but as of right this second all these things are yours. with this ring i give them all to you."], ["if you ever give away this ring or lose it, it means our love's doomed, and i'll have a right to be angry with you. bassanio", "madam, you've left me speechless, but my feelings are responding to your words. i'm as confused as a crowd of people going wild after hearing their prince give a speech. but the day i take this ring off will be the day i die. if you see me without it, you can be confident i'm dead.", "my lord and lady, it's now our turn, who have been watching as our dreams came true. now we can shout, \"congratulations, congratulations, my lord and lady!\"", "my lord bassanio, and my dear lady, i wish you all the joy i can wish for. and when you get married, i hope i can be married at the same time.", "absolutely, if you can find a wife by then.", "i think i've found one already, thanks to you, my lord. i can fall in love just as quickly as you can, and i loved nerissa as soon as i laid eyes on her. you fell in love with portia, and i fell in love with nerissa, because i'm not in the habit of delaying any more than you are, my lord. your fate depended on those boxes, and it turns out that mine did too. i couldn't help but chase her. i started making love vows to her till my mouth was dry. then finally she said she loved me and would marry me if you two got married as well."], ["is that true, nerissa?", "yes, madam, it is, if it's all right with you.", "and do you mean what you're saying, gratiano?", "yes, my lord.", "then we'd be honored to have you join us in our wedding ceremony.", "nerissa let's bet them a thousand ducats that we will have a son first.", "you want to stake the money down now?", "hey, if i lay down my \" ,\" i'll never be able to have a son. but who's this coming? lorenzo and his pagan girlfriend? what, and my old venetian friend salerio?", "welcome, lorenzo and salerio. i hope my position in this new house is firm enough to allow me the right to welcome my friends. portia with your permission, portia, i welcome my good friends and countrymen."], ["i do too, my lord. they're entirely welcome.", "bassanio thank you, sir. i didn't intend to come see you. but i ran into salerio on the way, and he begged me to come along with him until i couldn't say no.", "that's true, and with good reason. this letter is for you from signor antonio. bassanio", "before i open this letter, please tell me how my good friend is doing.", "he's not sick, my lord, but he's very upset, and his problems are serious. his letter will tell you how he's doing.", "jessica nerissa, welcome this stranger. salerio, welcome. any news from venice? how's the great merchant antonio doing? i know he'll be happy to hear of our success. we're like the ancient hero jason, we went looking for the golden fleece and we won it!"], ["i wish you'd won the he lost.", "something bad in that letter is making bassanio turn pale. some good friend of his must have died, because nothing else in the world could change a man so much. what, does the news only get worse? please, bassanio, i'm half of you, so let me bear half the burden this letter brings you.", "oh portia, these are some of the worst words that ever stained a piece of paper. my darling, when i gave my love to you, i told you that all the wealth i had ran within my veins that i have noble blood, but no money. when i said that, i told you the truth. but my dear, when i said i was worth nothing, i was actually bragging i should've said that i was worse than nothing. i've borrowed money from a dear friend who in turn borrowed money from his mortal enemy for my sake. here's a letter, my dear. the paper's like my friend's body, and every word in it is a bleeding wound on that body. but is it true, salerio? have all his business ventures failed? not even one success? he had ships to tripolis, mexico, england, lisbon, north africa, and india, and not one of these ships avoided the rocks?"], ["not one, my lord. anyway, even if he had the money now, the jew probably wouldn't take it. i've never seen a creature with a human shape who was so eager to destroy a man. he's at the duke's morning and night, accusing the state of harming free trade if they deny him justice. twenty merchants, the duke himself, and the highest-ranking venetian nobles have all tried to persuade him to forget his contract, but nobody can do it. he's determined to get the penalty specified in his contract with antonio.", "when i was still living with him i heard him swear to tubal and cush, his countrymen, that he'd rather have antonio's flesh than twenty times the sum antonio owed. and i know that unless the law intervenes, it'll be bad news for poor antonio.", "is this your good friend who's in so much trouble?", "yes, he's my best friend, the kindest man and most courteous to others. he's more honorable than anyone else in italy.", "how much does he owe the jew?", "three thousand ducats."], ["what, that's all? pay him six thousand and cancel the debt. i'd pay twelve thousand before i'd let a friend like that suffer in the slightest because of you. first come with me to church to get married. then you can leave for venice to see your friend. you have to go, because you'll never sleep next to me peacefully without settling this. i'll give you enough gold to pay back your debt twenty times over. when it's paid, bring your friend back. until you get back, nerissa and i will live like virgins and widows. come on, let's go, because you're going to leave me the same day we get married. put on a happy face, and welcome your friends. since it's costing me a lot to marry you, i'll think of you as even more precious. but let me hear the letter from your friend.", "\"dear bassanio, my ships have all been wrecked. my creditors are getting mean. my money's almost run out. i couldn't pay my debt to the jew on the due date. since i'll certainly die when he takes his collateral out of my flesh, all debts are cleared between you and me if i can just see you again before i die. in any case, do what you want. if your affection for me doesn't convince you to come, don't let my letter do so.\"", "oh, my darling, make your arrangements and go!", "since you're letting me leave, i'll hurry. but i won't sleep till i get back."], ["jailer, watch out for this one. don't try to convince me to feel sorry for him. this is the fool who lent out money without charging interest. jailer, keep an eye on him.", "listen to me, good shylock.", "i'm going to get my . don't try to say anything against my taking my bond. i've sworn an oath that i will have my bond. you called me a dog before you had any reason to. but since i'm a dog, beware my fangs. the duke will give me justice. i do wonder, jailer, how you can be so foolish as to let this prisoner out of his cell.", "please, listen to me.", "i want my bond. i won't listen to you. i want my bond, so stop talking. i won't be taken for a fool who sighs and gives in to christian meddlers. don't follow me. i'm not talking with you. i want my bond.", "he's the most stubborn dog that ever lived among humans."], ["leave him alone. i won't follow him around with useless pleas anymore. he wants me dead. i know the real reason. i've often given money to people who were unable to pay back their loans to him. that's why he hates me.", "i'm sure the duke will never allow this contract to be enforced.", "the duke can't deny the law, because that would threaten the security of all foreign merchants in venice, and that's how the city makes its money. if the government disregards the law, it will be discredited. so go. i've lost so much weight worrying about my losses have that i'll hardly have a pound of flesh to spare for my bloody creditor tomorrow. well, jailer, let's go. i hope to god that bassanio comes to see me pay his debt. after that, i don't care what happens."], ["madam, i hope you don't mind my saying that i admire your noble respect for friendship, which you show in letting your husband go off to help his friend like this. if you only knew the man you're helping out, and what a faithful gentleman he is and how much he loves your husband, i know you'd be even prouder of your kindness than you normally might be.", "i've never regretted doing good, and i don't now. friends who spend a lot of time together and really care equally for each other must have many traits in common. since antonio's my husband's best friend, they must be very similar men. in that case, the money i've sent is a small price to pay to rescue someone who resembles my bassanio, who's like my own soul. anyway, let's change the subject, since i feel like i'm starting to flatter myself. i have a favor to ask of you. lorenzo, please take charge of the management of my house until my husband comes back."], ["i've sworn to god that i'll live a life of prayer and contemplation until my husband returns. only nerissa will keep me company. there's a monastery two miles away where we can stay. please say you'll agree, because i really need you to do this.", "madam, with all my heart. i'll do anything you ask.", "i've already spoken to my staff about this. they'll consider you and jessica masters of this house in place of lord bassanio and myself. so goodbye until we meet again.", "i hope you can relax and enjoy yourself!", "i hope you find peace and happiness, my lady.", "thank you. i wish you the same. goodbye, jessica.", "now, balthazar, you've always been honest and faithful to me, and i trust you still are. balthazar take this letter to padua as fast as you can. make sure you put it into the hands of my cousin bellario, the doctor of laws."], ["and as quickly as possible, take whatever letters and clothes he gives you to the public ferry that goes back and forth to venice. don't waste time talking now. just go. i'll meet you at the ferry.", "i'll go as fast as i can, madam.", "come on, nerissa, i have many things to do that you don't even know about yet. we'll see our husbands before they even have a chance to miss us.", "will they see us?", "they will, nerissa, but we'll be disguised as men. i'll bet you anything that i'll be handsomer than you when we're both dressed up. i'll wear my sword more gracefully, and speak like a teenage boy, and walk with a manly stride rather than my ladylike steps. i'll talk about fights like a bragging youth, and i'll tell cute lies about honorable ladies who fell in love with me and got sick and died when i rejected them. they just died, what could i do! then i'll start feeling sorry for them, wishing i hadn't killed them. i'll tell twenty lies like that, so men will think i graduated from school at least a year ago. i know a thousand immature tricks like that, and i'll use them all."], ["why, are we turning to men?", "what kind of question is that! if i had a dirty mind, i'd think you meant turning to men for sex. here, i'll tell you my whole plan in my carriage, which is waiting for us at the gate. so hurry up, because we have twenty miles to cover today."], ["yes, look, it's true that children are punished for the sins of their fathers. that's why i'm worried about you. i've always been straightforward with you, so now i'm telling you what i think. cheer up, because i think you're going to hell. there's only one hope for you, and even that's a kind of illegitimate hope.", "what hope is that, may i ask?", "you can hope your father isn't your real father. maybe your mother fooled around, and you aren't the jew's daughter.", "that really is an illegitimate hope. then i'd be punished for the sins of my mother.", "in that case i'm afraid you're damned by both your father and your mother. when you avoid one trap, you fall into another. you're in trouble either way.", "my husband will save me. he's made me a christian.", "he was wrong to do that. there were enough christians before as many of them as could stand to live near each other. all these new christians will make the price of hogs go up. if we're all pork-eaters, we won't be able to get our hands on a slice of bacon, even if we've got the money for it."], ["i'll tell my husband what you've said, launcelot. here he comes.", "you're going to make me jealous, launcelot, if you keep taking my wife into dark corners like this!", "no, you don't need to worry about us, lorenzo. launcelot and i can't agree on anything. he says i won't get into heaven because i'm a jew's daughter, and he says you're irresponsible because by converting jews to christianity you're raising the price of pork.", "i can justify that better than you can justify sleeping with portia's african servant. the is pregnant with your child, launcelot.", "it's too bad there's more of the moor than there ought to be. well, even if she's a less than honest woman, she's still a lot respectable than i thought at first.", "any fool can make puns! i think the best sign of intelligence will soon be silence, and talking will only be a good thing for parrots to do. go in and tell the servants to get ready for dinner.", "that's already been done, sir. they're all ready to eat dinner."], ["good lord, what a clown you are! tell them to the dinner.", "that's also been done, sir. the word you're looking for is \" .\"", "will you cover, then?", "no, sir i know my duty.", "you keep finding ways to mock me! are you planning on showing me all your wit at once? please understand my simple message: go tell the servants to set the table and bring in the food, and we'll come in to dinner.", "about the table, sir, dinner will be served on it. as for the food, it will be served in covered dishes. as for your coming in to dinner, just do what you feel is right.", "oh, he's good at bending words around! the fool has memorized a whole army full of fancy words. i know jesters in better positions, with the same talents he has. they also like to digress from the topic at hand by playing with language. anyway, how are you, jessica? and how do you like lord bassanio's wife?"], ["i like her more than i can say. bassanio should live an upstanding life because having a wife like portia is a blessing. it's as if he found heaven here on earth. and if he doesn't deserve this joy on earth, he'll never deserve it in heaven. imagine what would happen if two gods in heaven made a bet. if one of them used portia as his stake, the other god would have a hard time coming up with a human woman to match her value. the poor rude world doesn't have her equal.", "as good a wife as she is, that's how good a husband i am to you.", "i'll be the judge of that!", "i'll give you a chance to judge later. first let's go to dinner.", "no, let me say some good things about you while i'm in the mood.", "no, please, save it for dinner conversation. that way, no matter what you say, i'll digest it with everything else.", "in that case i'll serve you up like a dish of food."], ["is antonio here?", "yes, sir, i'm here.", "i feel sorry for you. you've come to face a ruthless enemy, an inhuman wretch incapable of pity, without any feelings of mercy.", "they tell me you've done everything you can to talk him out of what he's doing. but since he remains stubborn, and there's no legal way to protect me from his malice, i'll just have to take what he'll give me. i'm ready to suffer peacefully whatever he does to me in his cruelty and anger.", "one of you go call the jew into court here.", "he's standing ready outside the door. here he comes, my lord."], ["make room so he can stand in front of me. shylock, everyone thinks and i agree that you're just pretending to be cruel. they think that at the last second you're going to show mercy and pity, which will be more surprising than the bizarre cruelty that you seem to be showing now. and even though you're here to collect the penalty a pound of this poor merchant's flesh they think you'll not only let it go, but out of humanity and love you'll forgive some portion of the principal he owes you too. in doing so you'll be taking pity on him for his many recent losses, which have been large enough to send even the greatest merchant out of business, and make even the most hard-hearted turk or tartar feel sorry for him. what do you say? we all expect a nice answer from you, jew.", "i've told you what i intend to do, and i've sworn by the holy sabbath to seek the penalty that is due according to our contract. if you refuse to allow me to do so, your city's charter and its freedom are endangered. you're going to ask me why i'd rather have a pound of decaying flesh than three thousand ducats. i won't answer that. let's just say it's because i feel like it. is that enough of an answer? what if i had a rat in my house, and i felt like paying ten thousand ducats to have it exterminated? do you have your answer yet?"], ["some men don't like roast pig, others go crazy if they see a cat, and others can't help urinating when they hear bagpipes. there's no sense trying to explain people's likes and dislikes. so, to answer your question. just as there's no clear reason why one man doesn't want a roast pig, or why another man can't stand a harmless and useful cat, or another can't tolerate bagpipes, so i can't give a reason, and i won't give a reason other than the simple hate and loathing i feel for antonio) why i'm pursuing this unprofitable case against him. does that answer your question?", "that's no answer, you heartless man. it doesn't excuse your cruel behavior.", "i don't have to give you answers that you like.", "does everyone kill what they don't love?", "does anyone hate something and not want to kill it?", "disliking something isn't the same thing as hating it.", "what, would you let a snake bite you twice?", "bassanio please don't bother arguing with the jew. you might as well go stand on the beach and ask the ocean to get smaller. you might as well ask a wolf why he killed the lamb and made its mother cry."], ["you might as well tell the pine trees on the mountain to stop waving their treetops when the storms blow through them. you might as well do the impossible rather than try to soften his jewish heart. it's the hardest thing imaginable. therefore i'm begging you, don't make any more offers, don't look for other ways to stop him. just let me receive my punishment, and let the jew take his penalty.", "shylock instead of your three thousand ducats, here are six thousand.", "if you offered me six times that, i wouldn't accept it. i would choose to take my penalty.", "how can you ever hope for mercy for yourself, when you don't give any now?", "why should i be afraid of your judgment when i haven't done anything wrong? many of you own slaves, which like your donkeys and dogs and mules you use to perform awful jobs just because you bought them. should i say to you, \"set them free! let them marry your children! why are you making them work so hard? let their beds be as soft as yours, and let them eat the same food as you\"? no, you'd answer, \"the slaves are ours.\" and that's just how i'm answering you. the pound of flesh that i want from him was very expensive. it's mine and i'm going to get it. if you refuse me, the laws of venice have no validity. i await justice. so answer me. will i get it?"], ["i have the authority to dismiss this court, unless bellario comes today. he's a legal expert i sent for to act as judge and help settle this matter.", "my lord, a messenger is waiting outside with letters from bellario. he's just come from padua.", "bring us the letters. call the messenger in.", "cheer up, antonio! keep up your courage, man! i'll give the jew my flesh, blood, bones, and everything before you lose one drop of blood for me.", "i'm like the one sick sheep in the flock, the one who deserves to die. the weakest fruit drops to the ground first, so let me drop. bassanio, the best thing you can do is to keep living and write an epitaph for my gravestone.", "have you come from bellario's office in padua?", "yes, my lord. bellario sends his greetings. duke", "shylock why are you sharpening your knife so eagerly?"], ["to cut my penalty from that bankrupt man over there.", "you're sharpening that knife not on your sole but on your soul, you cruel jew. no metal not even the executioner's axe could ever be half as sharp as your hatred. can't any prayers reach your heart?", "no, none that you're smart enough to make.", "oh, you're going to hell, you disgusting dog. killing you would be justice. you almost make me forget that i'm a christian. you make me want to agree with the philosopher pythagoras that animal souls are reincarnated in human bodies. your vicious dog soul used to belong to a wolf that was killed for slaughtering humans. when he died, his cruel soul passed out of his body and went into yours while you were lying in your unholy mother's womb. that's why your desires are wolfish, bloody, and ravenous.", "unless your taunts can undo the signature on my contract, you're just wearing out your lungs by speaking so loud. be quiet, boy, or you'll lose your mind. i stand here with the law on my side.", "this letter from bellario introduces us to a young and well-educated legal expert. where is he?", "he's waiting nearby to find out if you'll invite him in."], ["with all my heart. three or four of you go welcome him. in the meantime, i'll read bellario's letter out loud. \"i've received your letter but i'm very sick at the moment. as it happened, when your messenger came, a young lawyer from rome was visiting me. his name is balthazar. i told him about the case of the jew and antonio the merchant, and we consulted many books together. he knows my legal opinions about this matter, and he has his own expert opinions as well. i'm sending him in my place to answer your request for someone to act as judge in this matter. please don't underestimate him because he's so young. i never knew such a young man with such a mature head. i leave him to you. when you put him to the test, you'll see how wonderful he really is. you hear what the wise and educated bellario writes.\"", "and this is the legal professor, i take it. let me shake your hand. did old bellario send you here?", "yes, my lord.", "welcome. please have a seat. are you familiar with the case currently before the court?", "yes, thoroughly. which one is the merchant? and which one is the jew?"], ["antonio and shylock, both of you come forward.", "is your name shylock?", "shylock is my name.", "your case is most unusual, though the venetian law can't stop you from proceeding. antonio he has a claim on you, correct?", "yes, so he says.", "do you acknowledge the contract?", "yes, i do.", "then the jew must show you mercy.", "why do i have to do that? tell me.", "no one shows mercy because he has to. it just happens, the way gentle rain drops on the ground. mercy is a double blessing. it blesses the one who gives it and the one who receives it. it's strongest in the strongest people. it looks better in a king than his own crown looks on him. the king's scepter represents his earthly power, the symbol of majesty, the focus of royal authority. but mercy is higher than the scepter. it's enthroned in the hearts of kings, a quality of god himself. kingly power seems most like god's power when the king mixes mercy with justice. so although justice is your plea, jew, consider this."], ["justice won't save our souls. we pray for mercy, and this same prayer teaches us to show mercy to others as well. i've told you this to make you give up this case. if you pursue it, this strict court of venice will need to carry out the sentence against the merchant there.", "i take all responsibility for my decisions. i want the law, the penalty, and the fulfillment of my contract.", "can't he pay back the money?", "yes. i'm offering to pay it back right this moment even twice the sum. if that's not enough, i'll sign a contract to pay ten times that much, and i'll give you my hands, my head, and my heart as security. if that's not enough, then you're just evil and malicious. duke i beg you, just this once, use your authority to bend the law. do a great right by doing a little wrong. don't let this devil have his way.", "that can't happen. there's no power in venice that can change an established decree. the change will be recorded as a precedent, and many bad legal decisions will result. that can't happen.", "a has come to judgment, yes, a daniel! oh, wise young judge, i honor you!"], ["please, let me review the contract.", "portia here it is, judge, here it is.", "shylock, they're offering you three times the money you lent.", "but i made an oath, an oath, an oath in heaven. should i perjure my soul by disobeying it? no, not for all of venice.", "the money wasn't paid back! and so the jew may lawfully claim a pound of flesh nearest the merchant's heart, to be cut off by him. but please have mercy. take three times your money. tell me to tear up this contract.", "i'll tear it up when it's paid. you seem like a good judge. you know the law. your explanation has made sense. i urge you to deliver your verdict. i swear that nothing anyone can say will change my mind. i'm sticking to the contract.", "i beg the court to deliver the verdict.", "well, then, here it is: you must prepare yourself for his knife.", "oh, good judge! oh, you excellent young man!"], ["the law fully authorizes the penalty, which you have to pay according to the contract.", "very true. oh wise judge! you're so much older than you look!", "antonio so bare your chest.", "yes, his chest! that's what the contract says, doesn't it, judge? \"nearest his heart.\" those are the very words.", "yes. is there a scale here to weigh the flesh?", "i have it ready.", "pay a surgeon to stand by and bind his wounds, shylock, so he doesn't bleed to death.", "is that called for in the contract?", "not explicitly, but so what? it wouldn't hurt you to be charitable.", "i can't find it. it's not in the contract.", "antonio you, merchant, do you have anything to say?", "not much. i'm ready and waiting. give me your hand, bassanio. goodbye."], ["don't be sad that this happened because of you, because lady luck's been nicer to me than usual. usually she makes the unhappy man live on after he loses his wealth, to spend his old age in poverty. but in my case she's letting me avoid that misery. send your honorable wife my greetings, and tell her how i died and how i loved you. speak well of me after i'm dead, and when the tale's done, ask her to judge whether bassanio had a friend. be sad only at the fact that you'll lose your friend your friend doesn't regret that he paid your debt. if the jew cuts deep enough, i'll pay it instantly with all my heart.", "antonio, i married a woman as dear to me as life itself. but life itself, my wife, and the whole world aren't more valuable to me than your life is. i'd give it all up yes, i'd sacrifice them all to this devil here to save you.", "your wife wouldn't like it if she were here to hear you make that offer.", "i have a wife i love. i wish she were in heaven so she could appeal to some power to make this dog jew change his mind.", "it's nice you're offering to sacrifice her behind her back. that wish of yours could start quite an argument back at home."], ["that's what you get for marrying christian husbands. i have a daughter. i wish she'd married any one of descendants instead of a christian! we're wasting time. please, deliver the sentence.", "a pound of this merchant's flesh is yours. the court awards it and the law authorizes it.", "what a righteous judge!", "and you have to cut this flesh from his chest. the law allows it, and the court awards it.", "what a wise judge! come on, get ready.", "but wait a moment. there's something else. this contract doesn't give you any blood at all. the words expressly specify \"a pound of flesh.\" so take your penalty of a pound of flesh, but if you shed one drop of christian blood when you cut it, the state of venice will confiscate your land and property under venetian law.", "oh, what an upright judge! pay attention, jew. oh, what a smart judge!", "is that the law?", "you can see for yourself. you asked for justice, so rest assured you'll get more justice than you bargained for."], ["oh, what a wise judge! pay attention, jew. a wise judge!", "in that case i'll take their offer. pay me three times the amount of the loan and let the christian go.", "here is the money.", "wait! the jew will have justice. wait, don't rush! he's not getting anything except the penalty.", "oh, jew, what an upright judge this is! what a wise judge!", "so get ready to cut off the flesh. don't shed any blood, or cut less or more than exactly a pound of flesh. if you take more or less than exactly a pound, even if it's just the tiniest fraction of an ounce if the scale changes by even so much as a hair, you die, and all your property will be confiscated.", "a second daniel! a daniel, jew! i've got you now, pagan.", "why is the jew waiting? take your penalty.", "give me my money and let me go.", "i have it ready for you. here it is."], ["no, he refused it publicly, in open court. he will have only justice and his penalty.", "a daniel, i keep saying it! a second daniel! thank you, jew, for teaching me that word.", "i won't even get the original three thousand ducats back?", "you can't have anything but the penalty, to be taken at your peril, jew.", "well, then, i hope he chokes on it! i'm not staying here to argue anymore.", "wait a minute, jew. the law has another hold on you. the laws of venice state that if a foreign resident directly or indirectly attempts to kill any citizen, the person he tried to kill will receive one half of the foreigner's goods. the other half goes to the state. whether the offending person lives or dies is up to the duke there's no one else to appeal to. in your predicament you've earned that punishment, because you've clearly contrived indirectly and directly too to take the life of the defendant. so get down on your knees and beg mercy from the duke."], ["beg to be allowed to hang yourself! but if you've handed over all your wealth to the state, you don't even have enough money left to buy a rope. so you'll be hanged at the state's expense.", "i want you to see the difference between us, so i pardon you even before you ask for a pardon. half of your wealth goes to antonio. the other half goes to the state. however, if you show a proper humility, i may reduce this penalty to a fine.", "yes, the state's half can be reduced, but not antonio's.", "no, go ahead and take my life. don't pardon that. you take my house away when you take the money i need for upkeep. you take my life when you take away my means of making a living.", "what mercy can you show him, antonio?", "a hangman's rope free of charge. nothing else, for god's sake!", "if the duke and his court agree to set aside the fine for one half of his property, i'm happy, as long as he lets me have the other half in trust, to give it to the gentleman who recently stole his daughter. i only ask two more things. first, shylock must immediately become a christian. second, he must make a will here in this court that leaves all his property to his son-in-law lorenzo and his daughter when he dies."], ["he must do this, or i'll recant the pardon i just delivered.", "are you satisfied, jew? what do you say?", "i'm satisfied.", "nerissa clerk, draw up a document to make his gift official.", "please let me go. i'm not well. send the deed after me and i'll sign it.", "go, but sign the deed.", "shylock when you're baptized a christian, you'll have two godfathers. if i'd been the judge, you would've had ten more twelve jurors to sentence you to death rather than baptism.", "portia sir, please come home with me to dinner.", "i'm very sorry, sir, but i have to go to padua tonight. i should really leave right away.", "i'm sorry you don't have time. antonio, give this gentleman a reward. in my opinion, you owe him a lot."], ["portia sir, thanks to you my friend and i have been freed from paying some awful penalties today. instead of giving the jew the three thousand ducats he's owed, we give it to you in gratitude for your kind efforts.", "and even then we're still indebted to you. we owe you love and service forever.", "being satisfied with a job well done is payment enough. in saving you i consider myself well paid. my thoughts were never on money. i hope you'll recognize me when we meet again. i wish you well. now, i've got to go.", "sir, i really feel the need to give you something. take some memento from us as a token of our gratitude, not as a fee. please do two favors for me. first, don't refuse me, and second, excuse me for insisting.", "since you keep insisting, i'll do as you say. antonio give me your gloves. i'll wear them for your sake. bassanio and as a souvenir of your appreciation, i'll take this ring from you. don't pull your hand back. i won't take anything more than this, and you can't refuse me this.", "this ring, sir oh no, it's nothing. i'd be ashamed to give you this.", "i don't want anything but that. now that i think about it, i really want it."], ["there's more to this ring than its cash value. i'll give you the most expensive ring in venice, and i'll make a public announcement to help me find it. but as for this ring, please excuse me.", "i see you like to make big offers, sir. first you taught me how to beg, and now i think you're teaching me how a beggar should be answered.", "good sir, this ring was given to me by my wife. when she put it on my finger, she made me swear never to sell it, give it away, or lose it.", "many men use that excuse to avoid giving gifts. if your wife's not a madwoman, and you tell her how much i deserve this ring, she won't stay angry at you forever if you give it to me. well, anyway, goodbye.", "bassanio, let him have the ring. consider how much he deserves it, and weigh that, along with my friendship, against your wife's order.", "gratiano go, gratiano, run and catch up with him. give him the ring, and take him to antonio's house if you can. go quickly.", "come on, you and i will go soon. early in the morning we'll both rush to belmont. come on, antonio."], ["find out where the jew's house is. give him this deed and have him sign it. we'll leave tonight and be home a day before our husbands get back. lorenzo will be happy with what we've done.", "portia bassanio sir, you're lucky i caught up with you. bassanio thought about it some more and sent this ring to you. he would like to invite you to dinner.", "i can't have dinner with him. please tell him i accept his ring with thanks. and could you please take my servant to old shylock's house?", "i'll do that.", "portia sir, may i speak with you? portia i'll see if i can get my husband's ring, which i made him swear to keep forever.", "nerissa i bet you'll be able to. they'll swear they gave the rings to men. but we'll deny it and outswear them too."], ["go, hurry. you know where i'll be waiting.", "gratiano sir, will you show me to shylock's house now?"], ["the moon's bright tonight. i think that on a night like this, when the wind blew the trees so gently that they didn't make a sound, climbed up onto the walls of troy and sighed for cressida in the greek camp.", "on a night like this, saw the lion's shadow and ran away in fear.", "on a night like this, stood holding a willow branch on the seashore, begging her lover to come back to her in carthage.", "on a night like this, gathered magic herbs to rejuvenate old aeson."], ["on a night like this, jessica ran away from the wealthy jew and stole his money. she ran away from venice all the way to belmont with her spendthrift lover.", "on a night like this, young lorenzo swore he loved her very much, stealing her heart with vows of love, but not one vow was true.", "on a night like this, pretty jessica, in a bad mood, said outrageously wrong things about her lover, and he forgave her.", "i'd get the better of you in this storytelling game, but somebody's coming. i hear his footsteps.", "who are you, coming so fast in this quiet night?", "a friend.", "a friend? what friend? what's your name, please, friend?", "my name's stephano, and i've come to tell you my mistress will arrive here at belmont before sunrise. she's still at the monastery, kneeling and praying for a happy marriage.", "who's coming with her?"], ["no one except her maid and a holy hermit. has my master returned yet?", "no, he hasn't, and we haven't heard from him. but let's go in, jessica. we'll get ready to welcome the mistress of the house back home.", "hey, hey! hey! yoo-hoo!", "who's shouting?", "hey! have you seen master lorenzo! master lorenzo, hey! hey!", "stop hollering, man! i'm here.", "hey! where, where?", "here.", "tell him a messenger has arrived from my master with good news. my master will be here in the morning.", "my dear, let's go inside and wait for them to arrive. but i guess it doesn't matter. why should we go in? stephano, tell the household staff that your mistress is about to arrive, and bring some musicians outside here."], ["how beautiful the moonlight's shining on this bank! let's sit here and let the music fill our ears. stillness and nighttime are perfect for beautiful music. sit down, jessica. look at the stars, see how the floor of heaven is inlaid with small disks of bright gold. stars and planets move in such perfect harmony that some believe you can hear music in their movement. if you believe this, even the smallest star sings like an angel in its motion. souls have that same kind of harmony. but because we're here on earth in our earthly bodies, we can't hear it.", "wake up the moon goddess with a hymn! get her attention and draw her home with music.", "i'm never in the mood to laugh when i hear sweet music.", "that's because your soul is paying attention to the music. take a wild herd of animals, or young untrained colts, leaping around like crazy, roaring and neighing loudly, which they have to do because it's in their blood but if they happen to hear a trumpet, or any kind of music, they all stand still. sweet music makes their wild eyes peaceful. that's why the poet ovid wrote that the great musician orpheus could make"], ["trees, stones, and rivers come to him by playing music. there's nothing in the world that can resist music. the man who can't be moved by the harmonious melodies is fit only for treason, violence, and pillage. his soul is as dull as night and dark as the underworld. nobody like that should be trusted. pay attention to the music.", "that light we see is coming from my hall. look how far that little candle sends its light! that's the way a good deed shines in a naughty world.", "while the moon was shining we didn't even notice the candle.", "well, brighter lights always dim the smaller ones. a governor shines as brightly as a king until a king is near by, and the governor suddenly looks like a nobody. music, listen!", "it's your music, madam, from your house.", "now i see that you can't call anything good except in right context. i think that music sounds much better at night than it does during the day.", "the night's silence makes it sound better.", "the crow sings as well as the lark when no one's listening. if the nightingale sang during the day, when every goose is honking, nobody would think it sang any better than a wren. how many things in life seem good to us because of when they happen! quiet now! look how the moon seems to be sleeping with its lover and can't be awoken!"], ["if i'm not mistaken, that's portia's voice.", "he recognizes me like a blind man recognizes a cuckoo by its bad voice.", "dear lady, welcome home.", "we've been praying for our husbands' welfare. we hope they're better off because of our prayers. have they come back?", "no, ma'am, they haven't. but a messenger came ahead to tell us they were on their way.", "go inside, nerissa. tell my servants not to mention that we were gone. you must not, either, lorenzo or you, jessica."], ["your husband's near. i hear his trumpet. we're not tattle-tales, madam, don't worry.", "i think this night is just like sick daylight. it only looks a little paler. it looks like a day when the sun is hidden.", "portia if you walked outside at night, it would be daylight here at the same time as on the other side of the world.", "i'll give to men, but i'll never be light or unchaste. an unfaithful wife makes a husband worry, and i'll never let bassanio worry if i can help it. i hope god figures it all out! welcome home, my husband.", "thank you, darling. i'd like to introduce you to my friend. this is antonio, my dearest friend. we are closely tied.", "you should be tied to him, since he tied himself up so much for you.", "but i've been paid back well.", "sir, welcome to our house. but action speaks louder than words, so i'll cut short these polite words."], ["nerissa i swear by that moon over there that you're doing me wrong! i'm telling the truth! i gave it to the judge's clerk. i wish the guy i gave it to had been castrated, since you're getting so upset about it.", "what, an argument already? what's the matter?", "we're arguing about a hoop of gold, a cheap little ring she gave me, that had a little inscription on it, nothing more than a knife-maker's attempt at poetry. it said, \"love me and don't leave me.\"", "how can you talk about the quality of the poem or the value of the ring? you swore to me when i gave it to you that you would wear it till you died, and that it would be buried with you. if you didn't want to take care of it for my sake, you should have just because you made so many vows that you'd take care of it. and now you claim you gave it to a judge's clerk! no, i swear to god that clerk will never grow a beard on his face.", "he will if he lives long enough to become a man.", "yes, if a woman grows up to be a man.", "i swear i gave it to a youth, a kind of boy, a little stunted boy, no taller than yourself. he was the judge's clerk, a chatty boy who wanted it as a fee. i didn't have the heart to say no to him.", "i have to be honest with you. you were wrong to give away your wife's first gift so thoughtlessly, a thing you swore to keep on your finger and bound faithfully to your body."], ["i gave my lover a ring and made him swear never to lose it or give it away. and here he is. i'd swear he wouldn't leave it behind, or even take it off his finger, for all the money in the world. to tell the truth, gratiano, you're giving your wife a valid reason to get upset. if it were me, i'd be very upset too.", "maybe i should cut off my left hand and swear i lost the ring defending it.", "bassanio gave his ring to the judge who asked for it, and deserved it too. and then his clerk, who went to a lot of trouble with the writing, begged for mine. neither of them would take anything but the two rings.", "which ring did you give away, my lord? not the one i gave you, i hope.", "if i could make things better by lying, i'd deny it. but you see my finger doesn't have the ring on it. it's gone.", "just as there's no ring on your finger, there's no truth in your heart. i swear i'll never get into your bed until i see the ring again!", "gratiano me neither, until i see mine again!"], ["my dear portia, if you knew who i gave the ring to, for whose sake i gave the ring to him, why i gave it to him, and how unwilling i was to leave it when he wouldn't accept anything but the ring, you wouldn't be so angry.", "if you'd known how much that ring meant, how much the woman who gave it to you is worth, or how much your honor depended on your keeping the ring, you wouldn't have let it go. who would be so unreasonable as to insist on taking the ring if you'd defended it with any kind of zeal? who would have had so little self-restraint that they'd insist on getting a ring with ceremonial value? nerissa's got the right idea. i'll bet my life you gave some woman the ring!", "no, i swear, madam. no woman got it from me, but an expert in civil law who refused three thousand ducats but asked instead for the ring, which i denied him. i watched him leave looking discontented, even though he had saved the life of my good friend. what could i say, my dear? i had to send it to him. i was ashamed and wanted to show my good manners. i just couldn't dishonor myself by acting ungrateful to him. please forgive me, good lady. if you'd been there, i think you would have begged me to give him the ring."], ["don't let that lawyer ever come near my house! since he has the jewel i loved, which you swore you'd keep forever, i'll be as generous as you were to him. i won't deny him anything of mine, including my own body and my husband's bed. i'll recognize him all right, i'm sure of it. so don't spend one night away from this house. watch me like a hawk. if you don't, if i'm left alone, i swear i'll have that legal expert as my bedfellow.", "gratiano and i'll have his clerk as mine. so be careful when you leave me to my own devices.", "well, go ahead. but don't let me catch him, because if i do i'll break that clerk's pen.", "all these quarrels are about me.", "don't be upset. you're welcome in our home in spite of everything that's going on.", "portia, forgive me for this mistake that i had to make. all these friends are my witnesses, so i swear to you, i swear by your beautiful eyes, in which i see myself reflected", "did you hear that! he sees himself in my two eyes, so there's two of him. he should swear by his two-faced self, and that's an oath i'll believe!"], ["no, just listen to me. if you forgive my mistake, i swear i'll never break an oath with you again.", "i lent my body once to make him rich. if it hadn't been for the gentleman who now owns your husband's ring, my body would've been lost. i'd be the guarantee again, promising my soul this time as penalty, if your husband ever breaks a vow again knowingly.", "antonio then you'll be my guarantee. give him this. and tell him to hold on to it better than the other one.", "bassanio portia here, bassanio, swear that you'll keep this ring.", "my god, it's the same one i gave the judge!", "i got it from him. i'm sorry, bassanio, but the legal expert slept with me in exchange for this ring.", "and i'm sorry too, gratiano, but that stunted lawyer's clerk slept with me last night in exchange for this ring.", "this is like fixing roads in the summer when they don't need to be fixed! what, did you cheat on us before we deserved it?"], ["don't be crass. you all look confused. here's a letter. read it at your leisure. it comes from padua, from bellario. you'll find out that portia was the lawyer, and nerissa was her clerk. lorenzo here will testify that i left the house right when you did, and just returned. i haven't yet entered my house. antonio, welcome. i have better news than you expect in store for you. antonio open this letter. you'll find out that three of your ships have suddenly arrived in the harbor loaded with a great deal of wealth. you'll never guess what a strange coincidence it was that i came across this letter.", "i'm speechless.", "portia you were the doctor, and i didn't even recognize you?", "nerissa were you the clerk with whom my wife's going to cheat on me?", "yes, but the clerk will never do it, unless he grows up to be a man.", "portia my sweet lawyer, you'll be my bedfellow. when i'm not there, you can sleep with my wife.", "madam, you've given me life and given me a living too. i've read in this letter that my ships have safely come to harbor."], ["how are you, lorenzo? my clerk has some comforting news for you, too.", "yes, and i'll give it to him for free. lorenzo this is from the rich jew, for you and jessica. it's a special testament. after he dies, you'll inherit everything he owns.", "ladies, you're dropping bread from the heavens to starving people.", "it's almost morning, but i'm sure you're not fully satisfied about what happened. let's go inside and we'll answer all your questions truthfully.", "all right, then. my first question for nerissa is whether she'd rather wait till tomorrow night or go to bed now, since there are only two more hours till morning. when the day comes, i'll wish it were nighttime, so i could sleep with the legal expert's clerk. in any case, i won't worry about anything for the rest of my life more than keeping nerissa's ring safe."]], [["our wedding day is almost here, my beautiful hippolyta. we'll be getting married in four days, on the day of the new moon. but it seems to me that the days are passing too slowly the old moon is taking too long to fade away! that old, slow moon is keeping me from getting what i want, just like an old widow makes her stepson wait to get his inheritance.", "no, you'll see, four days will quickly turn into four nights. and since we dream at night, time passes quickly then. finally the new moon, curved like a silver bow in the sky, will look down on our wedding celebration.", "go, philostrate, get the young people of athens ready to celebrate and have a good time. sadness is only appropriate for funerals. we don't want it at our festivities.", "hippolyta, i wooed you with violence, using my sword, and got you to fall in love with me by injuring you. but i'll marry you under different circumstances with extravagant festivals, public festivities, and celebration.", "long live theseus, our famous and respected duke!"], ["thanks, good egeus. what's new with you?", "i'm here, full of anger, to complain about my daughter hermia. step forward, demetrius. my lord, this man, demetrius, has my permission to marry her. step forward, lysander. but this other man, lysander, has cast a magic spell over my child's heart. you, you, lysander, you've given her poems, and exchanged tokens of love with my daughter. you've pretended to be in love with her, singing fake love songs softly at her window by moonlight, and you've captured her imagination by giving her locks of your hair, rings, toys, trinkets, knickknacks, little presents, flowers, and candies things that can really influence an impressionable young person. you've connived to steal my daughter's heart, making her stubborn and harsh instead of obedient (like she should be). and, my gracious duke, if she won't agree to marry demetrius right now, i ask you to let me exercise the right that all fathers have in athens. since she belongs to me, i can do what i want with her as the law says: i can either make her marry demetrius or have her killed.", "what do you have to say for yourself, hermia? think carefully, pretty girl. you should think of your father as a god, since he's the one who gave you your beauty. to him, you're like a figure that he's sculpted out of wax, and he has the power to keep that figure intact or to disfigure it. demetrius is an admirable man."], ["so is lysander.", "you're right, lysander's admirable too. but since your father doesn't want him to marry you, you have to consider demetrius to be the better man.", "i wish my father could see them with my eyes.", "no, you must see them as your father sees them.", "your grace, please forgive me. i don't know what makes me think i can say this, and i don't know if speaking my mind to such a powerful and noble person as yourself will damage my reputation for modesty. but please, tell me the worst thing that could happen to me if i refuse to marry demetrius.", "you'll either be executed or you'll never see another man again. so think carefully about what you want, beautiful hermia. consider how young you are, and question your feelings. then decide whether you could stand to be a nun, wearing a priestess's habit and caged up in a cloister forever, living your entire life without a husband or children, weakly chanting hymns to the cold and virginal goddess of the moon. people who can restrain their passions and stay virgins forever are holy. but although a virgin priestess might be rewarded in heaven, a married woman is happier on earth. a married woman is like a rose who is picked and made into a beautiful perfume, while a priestess just withers away on the stem."], ["i'd rather wither away than give up my virginity to someone i don't love.", "take some time to think about this. by the time of the next new moon the day when hippolyta and i will be married be ready either to be executed for disobeying your father, to marry demetrius as your father wishes, or to take a vow to spend the rest of your life as a virgin priestess of the moon goddess.", "please give in, sweet hermia. and lysander, stop acting like she's yours. i've got more of a right to her than you do.", "her father loves you, demetrius. so why don't you marry him and let me have hermia?", "it's true, rude lysander, i do love him. that's why i'm giving him my daughter. she's mine, and i'm giving her to demetrius.", "theseus my lord, i'm just as noble and rich as he is. i love hermia more than he does. my prospects are as good as his, if not better. and beautiful hermia loves me which is more important than all those other things i'm bragging about. why shouldn't i be able to marry her? demetrius and i'll say this to his face courted nedar's daughter, helena, and made her fall in love with him. that sweet lady, helena, loves devoutly. she adores this horrible and unfaithful man."], ["i have to admit i've heard something about that, and meant to ask demetrius about it, but i was too busy with personal matters and it slipped my mind. anyway, demetrius and egeus, both of you, come with me. i want to say a few things to you in private. as for you, beautiful hermia, get ready to do what your father wants, because otherwise the law says that you must die or become a nun, and there's nothing i can do about that. come with me, hippolyta. how are you, my love? demetrius and egeus, come with us. i want you to do some things for our wedding, and i also want to discuss something that concerns you both.", "we're following you not only because it is our duty, but also because we want to.", "what's going on, my love? why are you so pale? why have your rosy cheeks faded so quickly?", "probably because my cheeks' roses needed rain, which i could easily give them with all the tears in my eyes.", "oh, honey! listen, in books they say that true love always faces obstacles. either the lovers have different social standings"], ["oh, what an obstacle that would be! imagine being too high on the social ladder, and falling in love with someone beneath you.", "or else they were very different ages", "how awful! being too old to marry someone young.", "or else their guardians and advisors said no", "what hell, to have your love life determined by someone else!", "or, even if the lovers are a good match, their love might be ruined by war, death, or sickness, so that the affair only lasts an instant. their time together might be as fleeting as a shadow or as short as a dream, lasting only as long as it takes a lightning bolt to flash across the sky. before you can say \"look,\" it's gone. that's how intense things like love are quickly destroyed.", "if true lovers are always thwarted, then it must be a rule of fate. so let's try to be patient as we deal with our problem. it's as normal a part of love as dreams, sighs, wishes, and tears.", "that's the right attitude. so, listen, hermia. i have an aunt who is a widow, who's very rich and doesn't have any children. she lives about twenty miles from athens, and she thinks of me as a son. i could marry you there, gentle hermia, where the strict laws of athens can't touch us. so here's the plan. if you love me, sneak out of your father's house tomorrow night and meet me in the forest a few miles outside of town."], ["you remember the place i met you there once with helena to celebrate may day. i'll wait for you there.", "oh, lysander, i swear i'll be there tomorrow. i swear by cupid's strongest bow and his best gold-tipped arrow, by the goddess of love's innocent doves, by everything that ties lovers together, by the bonfire where queen dido burned herself to death when her lover aeneas jilted her, and by all the promises that men have broken (and men have broken more promises than women have ever made). i give you my word, i will meet you at that spot tomorrow.", "keep your promise, my love. look, here comes helena.", "hello, beautiful helena! where are you going?", "did you just call me \"beautiful\"? take it back. you're the beautiful one as far as demetrius is concerned. oh, you're so lucky! your eyes are like stars, and your voice is more musical than a lark's song is to a shepherd in the springtime. sickness is contagious i wish beauty were contagious too! i would catch your good looks before i left. my ear would be infected by your voice, my eye by your eye, and my tongue would come down with a bad case of your melodious speech. if the world were mine, i'd give it all up everything except demetrius to be you."], ["oh, teach me how you look the way you do, and which tricks you used to make demetrius fall in love with you.", "i frown at him, but he still loves me.", "oh, if only my smiles could inspire love as effectively as your frowns!", "i curse him, but he loves me.", "if only my prayers could inspire that kind of affection!", "the more i hate him, the more he follows me around.", "the more i love him, the more he hates me.", "it's not my fault he acts like that, helena.", "that's true, it's your beauty's fault. i wish i had a fault like that!", "don't worry. he won't see my face ever again. lysander and i are running away from here. before i saw lysander, athens seemed like paradise to me. but lysander's so attractive that he's turned heaven into hell!", "helena, we'll tell you about our secret plan. tomorrow night, when the moon shines on the water and decorates the grass with tiny beads of pearly light (the time of night that always hides runaway lovers), we plan to sneak out of athens.", "helena in the woods where you and i used to lounge around on the pale primroses, telling each other sweet secrets that's where lysander and i will meet."], ["from then on we'll turn our backs on athens. we'll look for new friends and keep the company of strangers. goodbye, old friend. pray for us, and i hope you win over demetrius! keep your promise, lysander. we need to stay away from each other until midnight tomorrow.", "i will, my hermia.", "goodbye, helena. i hope demetrius comes to love you as much as you love him!", "it's amazing how much happier some people are than others! people throughout athens think i'm as beautiful as hermia. but so what? demetrius doesn't think so, and that's all that matters. he refuses to admit what everyone else knows. but even though he's making a mistake by obsessing over hermia so much, i'm also making a mistake, since i obsess over him. love can make worthless things beautiful. when we're in love, we don't see with our eyes but with our minds. that's why paintings of cupid, the god of love, always show him as blind. and love doesn't have good judgment either cupid, has wings and no eyes, so he's bound to be reckless and hasty. that's why they say love is a child. because it makes such bad choices. just as boys like to play games by telling lies, cupid breaks his promises all the time. before demetrius ever saw hermia, he showered me with promises and swore he'd be mine forever."], ["but when he got all hot and bothered over hermia, his promises melted away. i'll go tell demetrius that hermia is running away tomorrow night. he'll run after her. if he's grateful to me for this information, it'll be worth my pain in helping him pursue my rival hermia. at least i'll get to see him when he goes, and then again when he comes back."], ["is everyone here?", "you should call their names one person at a time, in the order in which their names appear on this piece of paper.", "this is a list of the names of all the men in athens who are good enough to act in the play we're going to perform for the duke and duchess on their wedding night.", "first, peter quince, tell us what the play is about, then read the names of the actors, and then shut up.", "all right. our play is called .", "let me tell you, it's a great piece of work, and very funny. now, peter quince, call the names of the actors on the list. men, gather around him.", "answer when i call your name. nick bottom, the weaver?", "here. tell me which part i'm going to play, then go on.", "you, nick bottom, have been cast as pyramus."], ["what's pyramus? a lover or a tyrant?", "a lover who kills himself very nobly for love.", "i'll have to cry to make my performance believable. and as soon as i start crying, oh boy, the audience had better watch out, because they'll start crying too. i'll make tears pour out of their eyes like rainstorms. i'll moan very believably. name the other actors. but i'm really in the mood to play a tyrant. i could do a great job with hercules, or any other part that requires ranting and raving. i would rant and rave really well. like this, listen. . . oh, that was truly inspired! now tell us who the other actors are. by the way, my performance just now was in the style of hercules, the tyrant style. a lover would have to be weepier, of course.", "francis flute, the bellows-repairman?", "here, peter quince.", "flute, you'll be playing the role of thisbe."], ["who's thisbe? a knight on a quest?", "thisbe is the lady pyramus is in love with.", "no, come on, don't make me play a woman. i'm growing a beard.", "that doesn't matter. you'll wear a mask, and you can make your voice as high as you want to.", "in that case, if i can wear a mask, let me play thisbe too! i'll be pyramus first: \"thisne, thisne!\" and then in falsetto: \"ah, pyramus, my dear lover! i'm your dear thisbe, your dear lady!\"", "no, no. bottom, you're pyramus. and flute, you're thisbe.", "all right. go on.", "robin starveling, the tailor?", "here, peter quince.", "robin starveling, you're going to play thisbe's mother. tom snout, the handyman.", "here, peter quince.", "you'll be pyramus's father i'll play thisbe's father myself snug, the cabinetmaker, you'll play the part of the lion. so that's everyone. i hope this play is well cast now."], ["do you have the lion's part written down? if you do, please give it to me, because i need to start learning the lines. it takes me a long time to learn things.", "you can improvise the whole thing. it's just roaring.", "let me play the lion too. i'll roar so well that it'll be an inspiration to anyone who hears me. i'll roar so well that the duke will say, \"let him roar again. let him roar again.\"", "if you roar too ferociously, you'll scare the duchess and the other ladies and make them scream. and that would get us all executed.", "yeah, that would get every single one of us executed.", "well, my friends, you've got to admit that if you scare the living daylights out of the ladies, they'd have no choice but to execute us. but i'll soften my voice you know, it, so to speak so that i'll roar as gently as a baby dove. i'll roar like a sweet, peaceful nightingale.", "you can't play any part except pyramus. because pyramus is a good-looking man, the most handsome man that you could find on a summer's day, a lovely gentlemanly man. so you're the only one who could play pyramus.", "well then, i'll do it. what kind of beard should i wear for the part?", "whatever kind you want, i guess."], ["i'll play the part wearing either a straw-colored beard, or a sandy beard, or a red beard, or one of those bright yellow beards that's the color of a french coin.", "some french people don't have beards at all, because syphilis has made all their hair fall out, so you might have to play the part clean-shaven. but gentlemen, here are your scripts, and i beg you to please learn them by tomorrow night. meet me in the duke's forest a mile outside of town. it's best to rehearse there, because if we do it here in the city, we'll be bothered by crowds of people and everyone will know the plot of our play. meanwhile, i'll make a list of props that we'll need for the play. now make sure you show up, all of you. don't leave me in the lurch.", "we'll be there, and there we'll rehearse courageously and wonderfully, truly obscenely. work hard, know your lines. goodbye.", "we'll meet at the giant oak tree in the duke's forest.", "got it? be there, or don't show your face again."], ["hello, spirit! where are you going?", "i go over hills and valleys, through bushes and thorns, over parks and fenced-in spaces, through water and fire. i wander everywhere faster than the moon revolves around the earth. i work for titania, the fairy queen, and organize fairy dances for her in the grass. the cowslip flowers are her bodyguards. you'll see that their petals have spots on them those are rubies, fairy gifts. their sweet smells come from those little freckles. now i have to go find some dewdrops and hang a pearl earring on every cowslip flower. goodbye, you dumb old spirit. i've got to go. the queen and her elves will be here soon.", "the king's having a party here tonight. just make sure the queen doesn't come anywhere near him, because king oberon is extremely angry. he's furious because she stole an adorable boy from an indian king. she's never kidnapped such a darling human child before, and oberon's jealous. he wants the child for himself, to accompany him on his wanderings through the wild forests. but the queen refuses to hand the boy over to oberon. instead, she puts flowers in the boy's hair and makes a fuss over him."], ["and now oberon and titania refuse to speak to each other, or meet each other anywhere neither in the forest nor on the plain, nor by the river nor under the stars. they always argue, and the little fairies get so frightened that they hide in acorn cups and won't come out.", "unless i'm mistaken, you're that mischievous and naughty spirit named robin goodfellow. aren't you the one who goes around scaring the maidens in the village, stealing the cream from the top of the milk, screwing up the flour mills, and frustrating housewives by keeping their milk from turning into butter? aren't you the one who keeps beer from foaming up as it should, and causes people to get lost at night, while you laugh at them? some people call you \"hobgoblin\" and \"sweet puck,\" and you're nice to them. you do their work for them and give them good luck. that's you, right?", "what you say is true. that's me you're talking about, the playful wanderer of the night. i tell jokes to oberon and make him smile. i'll trick a fat, well-fed horse into thinking that i'm a young female horse. sometimes i hide at the bottom of an old woman's drink disguised as an apple. when she takes a sip, i bob up against her lips and make her spill the drink all over her withered old neck. sometimes a wise old woman with a sad story to tell tries to sit down on me, thinking i'm a three-legged stool. but i slip from underneath her and she falls down, crying, \"ow, my butt!\" and starts coughing, and then everyone laughs and has fun. but step aside, fairy! here comes oberon.", "and here's my mistress, titania. i wish he'd go away!"], ["how nice to see you, titania.", "what, are you jealous, oberon? fairies, let's get out of here. i've sworn i'll never sleep with him or talk to him again.", "wait just a minute, you brazen hussy. aren't you supposed to obey me, your lord and husband?", "if you're my lord and husband, i must be your lady and wife, so you're supposed to be faithful to me. but i know for a fact that you snuck away from fairyland disguised as a shepherd, and spent all day playing straw pipes and singing love poems to your new girlfriend. the only reason you left india was to come here and see that butch amazon hippolyta. she was your boot-wearing mistress and your warrior lover, and now that she's getting married to theseus, you've come to celebrate their marriage.", "how can you stand there shamelessly talking about me and hippolyta, when you know that i know about your love for theseus? weren't you the one who made him desert perigouna in the middle of the night, right after he'd raped her? and weren't you the one who made him cheat on all of his other girlfriends, like aegles, ariadne, and antiopa?"], ["these are nothing but jealous lies. since the beginning of midsummer, my fairies and i haven't been able to meet anywhere to do our dances in the wind without being disturbed by you and your arguments. we haven't been able to meet on a hill or in a valley, in the forest or a meadow, by a pebbly fountain or a rushing stream, or on the beach by the ocean without you disturbing us. and because you interrupt us so that we can't dance for them, the winds have made fogs rise up out of the sea and fall down on the rivers so that the rivers flood, just to get revenge on you. so all the work that oxen and farmers have done in plowing the fields has been for nothing, because the unripe grain has rotted before it was ripe. sheep pens are empty in the middle of the flooded fields, and the crows get fat from eating the dead bodies of infected sheep. all the fields where people usually play games are filled with mud, and you can't even see the elaborate mazes that people create in the grass, because no one walks in them anymore and they've all grown over. it's not winter here for the human mortals, so they're not protected by the holy hymns and carols that they sing in winter. so the pale, angry moon, who controls the tides, fills the air with diseases. as a consequence of this bad weather and these bad moods the seasons have started to change. cold frosts spread over the red roses, and the icy winter wears a crown of sweet summer flowers as some sick joke. spring, summer, fertile autumn and angry winter have all changed places, and now the confused world doesn't know which is which. and this is all because of our argument. we are responsible for this."], ["do something about it, then. you have the power to fix it. why would titania want to argue with her oberon? all i'm asking for is to have that little human boy as part of my crew.", "get over it. i won't give up this child for all of fairyland. his mother was one of my worshippers, and we always used to gossip together at night in india, sitting together by the ocean and watching the merchant ships sailing on the ocean. we used to laugh to see the sails fill up with wind so that they looked like they had big, pregnant bellies, as if the wind had gotten them pregnant. she would imitate them since she was already pregnant with the little boy and she would go sailing over the land herself to go get me little presents, and come back carrying gifts like she was a ship coming back from a voyage. but since she was a mortal, she died giving birth to that boy, and for her sake i'm raising him and will not give him up.", "how long do you plan to stay here in this forest?", "maybe until after theseus's wedding day. if you behave yourself and join us in our circle dance and moonlight celebrations, then you can come with us. if not, leave me alone, and i'll stay away from your turf.", "give me that boy and i'll come with you.", "not for your entire fairy kingdom. come, fairies, let's go. we're going to have an out-and-out brawl if i stay any longer."], ["well, go on your way, then. you won't leave this grove until i've paid you back for this insult. robin goodfellow my dear puck, come here. you remember the time when i was sitting on a cliff, and i heard a mermaid sitting on a dolphin's back sing such a sweet and harmonious song that it calmed the stormy sea and made stars shoot out of the sky so they could hear her better?", "yes, i remember.", "that same night, i saw cupid flying from the moon to the earth, with all of his arrows ready. (you couldn't see him, but i could.) he took aim at a beautiful young virgin who was sitting on a throne in the western part of the world, and he shot his arrow of love well enough to have pierced a hundred thousand hearts. but i could see that cupid's fiery arrow was put out by watery, virginal moonbeams, so the royal virgin continued her virginal thoughts without being interrupted by thoughts of love. but i paid attention to where cupid's arrow fell. it fell on a little western flower, which used to be white as milk but now has turned purple from being wounded by the arrow of love. young girls call it \"love-in-idleness.\" bring me that flower. i showed it to you once. if its juice is put on someone's eyelids while they're asleep, that person will fall in love with the next living creature he or she sees. bring me this plant, and get back here before the sea monster has time to swim three miles.", "i could go around the world in forty minutes."], ["when i have the juice of that flower, i'll trickle some drops of it on titania's eyes while she's sleeping. she'll fall madly in love with the first thing she sees when she wakes up even if it's a lion, a bear, a wolf, a bull, a monkey, or an ape. and before i make her normal again i can cure her by treating her with another plant i'll make her give me that little boy as my page. but who's that coming this way? i'll make myself invisible and listen to their conversation.", "look, i don't love you, so stop following me around. where are lysander and beautiful hermia? lysander i want to stop, but hermia stops my heart from beating. you told me they escaped into this forest. and here i am, going crazy in the middle of the woods because i can't find my hermia. go away, get out of here, and stop following me.", "you attract me to you, you cruel magnet! but you must not attract iron, because my heart is as true as steel. if you let go of your power to attract me, i won't have any power to follow you.", "do i ask you to follow me? do i speak to you kindly? don't i tell you in the clearest terms that i do not and cannot love you?"], ["yes, but that makes me love you even more. i'm your little dog, demetrius. the more you beat me, the more i'll love you. treat me like you would treat a dog kick me, hit me, neglect me, try to lose me. just let me follow behind you, even though i'm not good enough for you. could i ask for a worse place in your heart than to be treated as you would treat a dog? and yet i would consider it an honor to be your dog.", "don't push it. just looking at you makes me sick.", "and i get sick when i can't look at you.", "you're risking your reputation by leaving the city and stalking someone who doesn't love you. standing around alone in a deserted area in the middle of the night isn't the best way to protect your virginity.", "i rely on your virtue to protect me. and because i can see your shining face, it doesn't feel like nighttime to me. this forest doesn't seem deserted when you're here, because you are all the world to me. so how can anyone say i'm alone, when the whole world is here to look at me?", "i'll run away from you and hide in the bushes, and leave you to the mercy of wild animals.", "the wildest animal isn't as cruel as you are. run whenever you want to. the story of daphne and apollo will be changed:"], ["the lustful god apollo runs away from the virginal nymph daphne who pursues him, the dove chases after the griffin, which is usually its predator, and the gentle deer tries to hunt down the tiger speed is useless when the cowardly person chases and the brave person runs away.", "i'm not sticking around to listen to you any longer. leave me alone. or if you follow me, you'd better understand that i'll do something bad to you in the forest.", "yes, you already hurt me in the church, in the town, and in the fields. shame on you, demetrius! your behavior is an insult to all women. we cannot fight for love as men can. we should be pursued and courted. we weren't made to do the pursuing.", "i'll follow you and turn this hell i'm in into a kind of heaven. it would be heavenly to be killed by someone i love so much.", "goodbye, nymph. before he leaves this part of the forest, you'll change places: you'll be the one running away, and he'll be in love with you.", "do you have the flower? welcome, traveler.", "yes, here it is.", "please, give it to me. robin i know a place where wild thyme blooms, and oxlips and violets grow. it's covered over with luscious honeysuckle, sweet muskroses and sweetbrier."], ["titania sleeps there sometimes at night, lulled to sleep among the flowers by dances and other delights. snakes shed their skin there, and the shed skin is wide enough to wrap a fairy in. i'll put the juice of this flower on titania's eyes, and fill her with horrible delusions and desires. robin you take some of it too, and look around in this part of the forest. a sweet athenian lady is in love with a young man who wants nothing to do with her. put some of this flower's juice on his eyes, and make sure to do it in such a way that the next thing he sees will be the lady. you'll be able to tell it's him because he's wearing athenian clothes. do it carefully, so that he'll end up loving her more than she loves him. and then make sure to meet me before the rooster's first crow at dawn.", "don't worry, sir. i'm at your service."], ["come, dance in a circle and sing a fairy song, and then go off for a while to do your work. some of you will kill the worms infesting the rosebuds, some of you will fight with bats to get their leathery wings, so we can make coats for my small elves. some of you will keep that loud owl away, the one that hoots and wonders every night at us dainty fairies. sing me to sleep now, and then go off to do your duties and let me rest.", ", . . .", ". . . .", "."], [". .", ". . . .", "okay, let's go! everything's fine now. one of us will stay and stand guard.", "titania whatever you see first when you wake up, think of it as your true love. love him and yearn for him, even if he's a lynx, a cat, a bear, a leopard, or a wild boar. whatever's there when you wake up will be dear to you. wake up when something nasty is nearby.", "my love, you look like you're about to faint from wandering in the woods for so long, and to tell you the truth, i've gotten us lost."], ["we'll take a rest, if you think it's a good idea, and wait until daylight when things will be easier.", "let's do that, lysander. find something to cushion you while you sleep. i'm going to rest my head on this little slope.", "we can both sleep together on the grass. we'll have one heart, one bed, two bodies, and one faithful vow.", "no, lysander. please, for my sake, sleep a little farther away. don't sleep so close to me.", "oh, sweetheart, i didn't mean anything naughty when i said that. when lovers talk to each other, their hearts should understand each other. i just meant that our hearts are joined, so we can almost think of them as one heart. our two bodies are linked together by the promises we've made to each other, so there are two bodies and one faithful vow. so let me sleep next to you. if i lie to you, i won't lie you i'll be faithful and respect you.", "lysander's got a way with words. i would certainly be rude and shameful if i had implied that you were a liar. but please, darling, sleep a little farther away so we can behave properly. it's only proper for a well-behaved bachelor and a well-behaved girl to be physically separated like this. stay away for now, and good night, my sweet friend. i hope your love for me remains this strong for your entire life!", "amen to that. i hope my life ends before my loyalty to you does. i'll sleep over here. sleep well!"], ["you sleep well too.", "i've been through the entire forest, but i haven't found any athenian man to use the flower on. lysander hermia wait a second, who's this? he's wearing athenian clothes. this must be the guy who rejected the athenian girl. and here's the girl, sleeping soundly on the damp and dirty ground. pretty girl! she shouldn't lie near this rude and heartless man. lysander jerk, i throw all the power of this magic charm on your eyes. when you wake up, let love keep you from going back to sleep. wake up when i'm gone, because now i have to go to oberon.", "stop, demetrius! stop, even if only to kill me.", "i'm telling you, get out of here, and don't follow me around like this.", "oh, will you leave me alone in the dark? don't."], ["stay here at your own risk. i'm going on alone.", "oh, i'm out of breath from this foolish chase. the more i pray, the less i get out of it. hermia is lucky, wherever she is, because she has beautiful eyes. how did her eyes get so bright? not from crying. if that's the case, tears wash my eyes more than hers. no, no, i'm as ugly as a bear, since animals that see me run away in terror. so it's no surprise that demetrius runs away from me as if i were a monster. what evil and deceitful mirror made me think i could rival hermia's starry eyes? lysander but who's this here? lysander, on the ground? is he dead or sleeping? i don't see any blood or injuries lysander, if you're alive, wake up.", "i'd even run through fire if you told me to. radiant, beautiful helena! i feel like mother nature has allowed me to see into your heart, as if by magic. where is demetrius? oh, i'd kill that name with my sword if i could!", "don't say that, lysander. don't say that. why do you care that he loves hermia? what does it matter? hermia still loves you, so be happy.", "happy with hermia? no. i regret all the boring time i wasted with her. i don't love hermia; i love helena. who wouldn't love a dove more than a crow? a man's desires are influenced by his logical mind, and it's simply logical that you're more worthy of love than hermia is."], ["fruits and vegetables don't ripen until the right season of the year. likewise, i'm young, and my sense of reason has just ripened. i can finally see the light. my logic has more control over my desires than it used to, and it's telling me to look into your eyes, where i see every love story ever told.", "why does everyone always make fun of me? what have i done to deserve this kind of treatment from you? is it not enough, is it not enough, young man, that i'll never be pretty enough to get a kind look from demetrius? do you have to harp on my inadequacy? my god, it's wrong for you to woo me in such a cruel, disdainful way. but goodbye. i have to tell you, i thought you were a much kinder person than this. oh, how awful that a lady who's been rejected by one man should therefore be treated horribly by another one!", "she doesn't see hermia hermia, keep sleeping, and don't come near me ever again! eating too many sweets makes people sick to their stomachs, and people always hate the mistakes they made in the past worse than anyone else hates those mistakes. hermia, you're the sweet i've had too much of, and the mistake i used to make, so i hate you more than anyone else does. i'll use all my talents and efforts to serve helen and bring her honor."], ["help me, lysander, help me! get this snake off of my chest. oh, my god! what a terrible dream i just had! lysander, look how i'm shaking from fear. i thought a snake was eating my heart while you sat smiling and watching. lysander! what, is he gone? lysander, my lord! what, is he out of earshot? gone? no answer, nothing? oh, god, where are you? say something if you can hear me. say something, please! i'm almost fainting with fear. nothing? then i guess you're nowhere nearby. i'll find you or die right away."], ["are we all here?", "right on time. this is the perfect place to rehearse. this clearing will be the stage, and this hawthorn bush will be our dressing room. let's put on our play exactly as we'll perform it for the duke.", "peter quince", "what is it, jolly bottom?", "there are things in this comedy of pyramus and thisbe that will never work. first of all, pyramus has to take out a sword to kill himself, which the ladies in the audience won't be able to stand. what should we do about that?", "by god, that's a real problem, it's true.", "i think we'll have to leave out all the killing, come to think of it.", "not at all! i've got a plan that will fix everything. write me a prologue that i can recite to the audience before the play starts. i'll tell them that we won't hurt anyone with our swords, and that pyramus isn't really dead. and to make it even clearer, we can tell them that i'm playing pyramus but i'm not really pyramus really, i'm bottom the weaver. that'll keep them from being afraid."], ["all right, we'll have a prologue then. we'll write it in alternating eight- and six-syllable lines, just like in a ballad.", "no, add a couple more syllables. make it eight and eight.", "won't the ladies be scared of the lion?", "i'm really worried about that.", "sirs, you ought to think to yourself, bringing in god forbid! a lion amongst ladies is really terrible. there's no scarier wild bird than the living lion, and we should remember that.", "so we need another prologue to tell everyone he's not a real lion.", "no, we can just announce the actor's name, and let his face show through the lion costume, and have him say something himself. he should say the following, or something else to the same \"ladies,\" or \"lovely ladies,\" \"i would like to ask you\" or \"i would like to request of you\" or \"i would like to beg you\" \"not to be afraid, and not to tremble with fear. i value your lives as highly as my own. if you thought i was a real lion, i would be risking my life. but no, i am not at all a lion. i am a man, just like other men.\" and then he should say his name, and tell them plainly that he's snug the carpenter.", "all right, that's what we'll do then. but there are two things we still have to figure out. how are we going to bring moonlight into a room? because, you know, pyramus and thisbe meet by moonlight."], ["will the moon be shining on the night we're performing our play?", "we need a calendar! look in the almanac. look up moonshine, look up moonshine!", "yes, the moon will shine that night.", "well then, you can leave one of the windows open in the big hall where we'll be performing, and the moon can shine in through the window.", "yes, or else someone will have to come in carrying a bundle of sticks and a lantern and say he's come to or represent, the character of moonshine, because the man in the moon is supposed to carry sticks and a lantern. but there's still another problem: we need to have a wall in the big hall, because according to the story, pyramus and thisbe talked through a little hole in a wall.", "you'll never be able to bring in a wall. what do you think, bottom?", "someone should play the part of wall. he can have some plaster or clay or limestone or something on him to show the audience he's a wall. he can hold his fingers in a v-shape like this, and pyramus and thisbe can whisper to each other through that little crack.", "if we can do that, everything will be all right. now sit down, everybody, and rehearse your parts pyramus, you start. when you have said your lines, go hide in that bush. everyone else, go there too when you're not onstage."], ["who are these country bumpkins swaggering around so close to where the fairy queen is sleeping? what? are they about to put on a play? i'll watch. and i'll act in it, too, if i feel like it.", "speak, pyramus. thisbe, come forward.", "pyramus thisbe, flowers with sweet odious smells", "\"odors,\" \"odors.\"", "pyramus odors and smells are like your breath, my dearest thisbe dear. but what's that, a voice! wait here a while. i'll be right back!", "that's the strangest pyramus i've ever seen.", "am i supposed to talk now?", "yes, you are. you're supposed to show that you understand that pyramus just went to check on a noise he heard and is coming right back.", "thisbe most radiant pyramus, you are as white as a lily, and the color of a red rose on a splendid rosebush, a very lively young man and also a lovely jew. you are as reliable as a horse that never gets tired. i'll meet you, pyramus, at ninny's grave."], ["that's \"ninus's grave,\" man. and don't say all of that yet. you're supposed to say some of it as a reply to pyramus. you just said all your lines at once, cues and all. pyramus, enter. you missed your cue. it's \"never get tired.\"", "oh! thisbe as reliable as a horse that never gets tired.", "pyramus if i were handsome, my lovely thisbe, i would still want only you.", "help! it's a monster! we're being haunted. run, everyone, run!", "i'll follow you. i'll run you around in circles, through bogs and bushes and woods and thorns. sometimes i'll take the shape of a horse, sometimes i'll take the shape of a hound or a pig or a headless bear. sometimes i'll turn into fire! and i'll neigh like a horse and bark like a hound and grunt like a pig and roar like a bear and burn like a fire at every turn.", "why are they running away? this is some joke of theirs to scare me."], ["oh, bottom, you've changed! what have you got on your head?", "what do you think i've got on my head? you're acting like an ass, don't you think?", "god bless you, bottom, god bless you. you've been changed. reborn.", "i see what they're up to. they want to make an ass of me, to scare me if they can. but i won't leave this spot, no matter what they do. i'll walk up and down and sing a song, so they'll know i'm not afraid. , ,", "what angel is this who's waking me up from my bed of flowers?", ","], ["of course they don't say \"no\"! who'd waste his time talking to such a stupid bird? who'd bother to accuse even if the bird were telling him that his wife was cheating on him?", "please sing again, sweet human. i love to listen to your voice, and i love to look at your body. i know this is the first time i've ever seen you, but you're so wonderful that i can't help swearing to you that i love you.", "i don't think you've got much of a reason to love me. but to tell you the truth, reason and love have very little to do with each other these days. it's too bad some mutual friend of theirs doesn't introduce them. ha, ha! no, i'm just kidding.", "you're as wise as you are beautiful.", "no, that's not true. but if i were smart enough to get out of this forest, i'd be wise enough to satisfy myself.", "don't bother wishing you could leave this forest, because you're going to stay here whether you want to or not. i'm no ordinary fairy. i rule over the summer, and i love you. so come with me. i'll give you fairies as servants, and they'll bring you jewels from the depths of the ocean, and sing to you while you sleep on a bed of flowers. and i'll turn you into a spirit like us, so you won't die as humans do. come here, peaseblossom, cobweb, moth, and mustardseed!"], ["ready.", "me too.", "me too.", "and me too.", "where should we go?", "be kind and polite to this gentleman. follow him around. leap and dance for him. feed him apricots and blackberries, with purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries. steal honey from the bumblebees, and make candles out of the bees' wax. light them with the light of glowworms, so my love will have light when he goes to bed and wakes up. pluck off colorful butterfly wings, and use them to fan moonbeams away from his eyes as he sleeps. bow to him, fairies, and curtsy to him.", "hello, mortal!", "hello!", "hello!", "hello!", "i beg your pardon, sirs. please tell me your name, sir?"], ["cobweb.", "i'd like to get to know you better, mr. cobweb. if i cut my finger, i'll use you as a bandage to stop the bleeding. and your name, sir?", "peaseblossom.", "please, give my regards to your mother, mrs. peapod, and your father, mr. peapod. good mr. peaseblossom, i'd like to get to know you better too. and you, may i ask what your name is, sir?", "mustardseed.", "good mr. mustardseed, i know you very well. those cowardly, gigantic sides of beef have been responsible for many of your family members getting eaten as a condiment on beef. i swear to you, many members of your mustard family have made my eyes water before. i look forward to getting to know you better, mr. mustardseed.", "take good care of him. take him to my sleeping area. the moon looks sad to me. when she cries, all the little flowers cry too. they're sad because someone is prevented from having sex or is having it against her will. keep my lover quiet. bring him to me in silence."], ["i wonder if titania is awake yet, and if she is, i wonder what the first thing she saw was. whatever it is, she must be completely in love with it now.", "ah, here comes my messenger. what's going on, you crazy spirit? what havoc have you wreaked in this part of the forest?", "my mistress titania is in love with a monster. while she was sleeping in her bed of flowers, a group of bumbling idiots, rough workmen from athens, got together nearby to rehearse some play they plan to perform on theseus's wedding day. the stupidest one, who played pyramus in their play, finished his scene and went to sit in the bushes to wait for his next cue. i took that opportunity to stick a donkey's head on him. when it was time for him to go back onstage and talk to his thisbe, he came out of the bushes and everyone saw him. his friends ran away as fast as ducks scatter when they hear a hunter's gunshot. one of them was so frightened when he heard my footsteps that he yelled, \"murder!\" and called for help from athens. they were all so afraid that they completely lost their common sense. they started to become scared of inanimate objects, terrified by the thorns and briars that catch at their clothing and pull off their sleeves and hats. i led them on in this frightened, distracted state, and left sweet"], ["pyramus there, transformed into someone with a donkey's head. at that exact moment, titania woke up and immediately fell in love with him, an ass.", "this is going even better than i planned. but have you put the love juice from the flower on the eyes of that athenian, as i asked you to do?", "yes, i found him when he was asleep so that's taken care of too and the athenian woman was sleeping near him. when he woke up, he must have seen her.", "robin step aside. here's the athenian coming now.", "oberon that's definitely the woman i saw, but it's not the same man.", "why are you so rude to someone who loves you so much? save that kind of harsh language for your worst enemy.", "i'm only scolding you now, but i should treat you much worse, because i'm afraid you've given me good reason to curse you. if you killed lysander while he was sleeping, then you're already up to your ankles in blood. you might as well jump right into a bloodbath and kill me, too."], ["he was more faithful to me than the sun is to the daytime. would he have snuck away from me while i was asleep? i'll believe that when i believe that there's a hole through the center of the earth, and the moon has passed all the way through to the other side. the only possibility is that you've murdered him. a murderer should look like you do, so pale and grim.", "that's how someone who's been murdered should look, and that's how i look. you've pierced me through the heart with your cruelty, and yet you, the murderer, look as bright and clear as a star in the sky.", "what does that have to do with my lysander? where is he? oh, good demetrius, will you find him for me?", "i would rather feed his corpse to my dogs.", "get out, dog! you've driven me to my wit's end. did you kill him, then? from now on i won't even consider you a human being. oh, just tell the truth for once. tell the truth, if only for my sake. would you have even dared to look at him when he was awake? and did you kill him while he was sleeping? oh, how brave of you! a snake could do that as easily as you could. a snake did do it, because no snake ever had a more forked, lying tongue than you have.", "you're getting all worked up over a misunderstanding. i didn't kill lysander. ?as far as i know, he's not even dead.", "then please tell me he's all right.", "if i told you that, what would i get out of it?"], ["the privilege of never seeing me again. and now i'm going to leave your despised company. you'll never see me again, whether or not he's dead.", "i can't go after her when she's in a rage like this. so i'll stay here for a while. sadness gets worse when you haven't had enough sleep. i'll try to sleep a little here. demetrius", "robin what have you done? you've made a mistake and put the love-juice on someone else, someone who was truly in love. because of your mistake someone's true love must have turned bad, instead of this man's false love being turned into a true love.", "in that case, it must be fate. that's the way of the world. for every man who's faithful to his true love, a million end up running after a different lover.", "go around the forest, moving faster than the wind, and make sure you find helena of athens. she's lovesick, and her face is pale from all the sighing she's been doing, because sighing is bad for the blood. bring her here with some trick or illusion, and i'll put the charm on his eyes for when she comes.", "i go, i go, look at me go faster than an arrow from a bow."], ["demetrius you purple flower, hit by cupid's arrow, sink into the pupils of this man's eyes. when he sees the girl he should love, make her seem as bright to him as the evening star. young man, when you wake up, if she's nearby, beg her to cure your lovesickness.", "helena is nearby, boss. the young man who i mistook for this one is there too, begging her to love him. should we watch this ridiculous scene? lord, what fools these mortals are!", "step aside. the noise they're making will wake up demetrius.", "then the two of them will both pursue one girl. that will be funny enough, and preposterous situations are my favorite thing.", "why do you think i'm making fun of you when i tell you i love you? people don't cry when they're mocking someone."], ["look, when i swear that i love you, i cry, and when someone cries while he's making a promise, he's usually telling the truth. how can it seem like i'm making fun of you, when my tears prove that i'm sincere?", "you get trickier and trickier. you've made the same promises to me and to hermia they can't both be true! they must both be false. the promises you're making to me belong to hermia. will you abandon her? if you weighed the promises you made to me against the promises you made to her, they'd come out the same they both weigh nothing. they're lies.", "i wasn't thinking clearly when i made those promises to her.", "and i don't believe you're thinking clearly now, as you break those promises.", "demetrius loves her, and he doesn't love you.", "oh helena, you goddess, you divine and perfect nymph! what can i compare your eyes to? crystal isn't as clear as they are. oh, your lips are as ripe as a pair of tempting cherries touching each other! the pure white of the snow on a mountaintop seems black as a crow's wing next to the whiteness of your hands. oh, let me kiss your beautiful white hand. it'll make me so happy!", "damn it! i see you're all determined to gang up on me for a few laughs. if you had any manners at all, you wouldn't treat me like this. can't you just hate me, as i know you do? do you have to get together to humiliate me too? if you were real men, as you pretend to be, you wouldn't treat a lady this way, making vows and promises and praising my beauty when i know you're really both disgusted by me. you're competing for"], ["hermia's love, and now you're competing to see which one of you can make fun of me the most. that's a great idea, a really manly thing to do making a poor girl cry! no respectable person would offend an innocent girl just to have some fun.", "don't be cruel, demetrius. i know you love hermia, and you know i know it. right here, right now, i swear i'm giving up all my claims on her and handing her to you. in exchange, give up your claim to love helena, since i love her and will love her until i die.", "nobody's ever gone to so much trouble just to make fun of someone.", "lysander, keep your hermia. i don't want her. if i ever loved her, all that love is gone now. my love for her was temporary. now i'll love helena forever.", "helena, it's not true.", "don't insult a deep love that you don't understand, or you'll pay the price. look, here comes the woman you love.", "it's hard to see clearly in the dark of night, but it's easier to hear well."], ["i couldn't see you, lysander, but i heard your voice, and that's how i found you. why did you leave me alone so unkindly?", "why stay when love tells you to go?", "but what love could make my lysander leave me?", "i had to hurry to my love, beautiful helena, who lights up the night better than all those fiery stars. why are you looking for me? didn't you figure out that i left you because i hate you?", "you can't mean what you're saying. it's impossible.", "so, she's in on this too! now i see that all three of them have gotten together to play this cruel trick on me. hurtful hermia, you ungrateful girl, have you conspired with these two to provoke me with this horrible teasing? have you forgotten all the talks we've had together, the vows we made to be like sisters to one another, all the hours we spent together, wishing that we never had to say goodbye have you forgotten? our friendship in our schooldays, our childhood innocence? we used to sit together and sew one flower with our two needles, sewing it on one piece of cloth, sitting on the same cushion, singing one song in the same key, as if our hands, our sides, our voices and our minds were stuck together. we grew together like twin cherries which seemed to be separate but were also together two lovely cherries on one stem."], ["we seemed to have two separate bodies, but we had one heart. do you want to destroy our old friendship by joining these men to insult your poor friend? it's not friendly, and it's not ladylike. all women would be angry with you for doing it, even though i'm the only one who's hurt by it.", "i'm completely dumbfounded by what you're saying. i'm not insulting you. it sounds more like you're insulting me.", "come on, confess. didn't you send lysander, as an insult, to follow me around praising my eyes and my face? haven't you made your other love, demetrius who kicked me with his foot not long ago call me a goddess and a divine, rare, precious, heavenly creature? why does he talk like that to a girl he can't stand? and why does lysander deny that he loves you, when he loves you so deeply? why would he show me any affection, unless you told him to? why does it matter that i'm not as lucky or lovable as you are and that the love i feel is unrequited? you should pity me for that reason, not hate me.", "i don't know what you're talking about.", "oh, fine. all right, go ahead, keep up your little game, pretend to be sympathetic, but then nudge each other and wink and make faces at me when i turn my back. keep up your wonderful game. you're doing such a good job on this trick, someone should write a book about it."], ["if you had any sense of pity, or manners, you wouldn't pretend to fight over me like this. but goodbye. it's partly my own fault, since i followed you here. leaving or dying will soon take care of everything.", "stay, lovely helena. listen to my excuse. my love, my life, my soul, beautiful helena!", "that's a good one.", "lysander don't insult her like that, lysander darling.", "lysander if hermia's begging can't make you stop insulting helena, i can force you to do so.", "you can't force me any more than hermia can beg me. your threats are no stronger than her whining. helena, i love you. i swear i do. i'll give my life for you, just to prove this guy wrong when he says i don't love you.", "i say that i love you more than he does.", "if that's what you say, go fight a duel with me and prove it.", "you're on. let's do it.", "lysander, where are you going with all this?", "hermia get away, you african!", "hermia no, no. he'll act like he's going to break free from you, hermia."], ["lysander pretend like you're going to follow me, but then don't come. you're a coward, get out of here!", "hermia stop hanging on me, you cat, you thorn. let go of me, or i'll shake you off like a snake.", "why have you gotten so rude? what's happened to you, my darling?", "your darling? get out, you dark-skinned gypsy! get out, you horrible poison. get out!", "are you joking?", "of course he is, and so are you.", "demetrius, i'm ready to fight you as promised.", "i wish we had a signed legal contract. i can see you don't keep your promises very well. i don't trust you.", "what? do you want me to hit hermia, hurt her, kill her? sure, i hate her, but i wouldn't hurt her.", "lysander can you hurt me any more than by saying you hate me? hate me? why? what's happened to you, my love? am i not hermia? aren't you lysander? i'm as beautiful now as i was a little while ago. you still loved me when we fell asleep, but when you woke up you left me. so you left me oh, god help me! for real?", "i certainly did, and i never wanted to see you again. so stop hoping and wondering what i mean."], ["i've spelled it out for you clearly. it's no joke. i hate you and love helena.", "oh, no! helena you trickster, you snake! you thief! what, did you sneak in at night and steal my love's heart from him?", "oh, that's very nice! you ought to be ashamed of yourself! you're going to make me mad enough to answer you? damn you, you faker, you puppet!", "\"puppet\"? why \"puppet\"? oh, i see where this is going. she's talking about our difference in height. she's paraded in front of him to show off how tall she is. she won him over with her height. does he have such a high opinion of you because i'm so short? is that it? so how short am i, you painted barber pole? tell me. how short am i? i'm not too short to gouge your eyes out with my fingernails.", "lysander demetrius please don't let her hurt me, gentlemen, however much you want to tease me. i never was much good with insults. i'm not mean and catty like her. i'm a nice shy girl. please don't let her hit me. maybe you think that because she's shorter than me i can take her."], ["\"shorter!\" see, she's doing it again!", "good hermia, please don't act so bitter toward me. i always loved you, hermia, and gave you advice. i never did anything to hurt you except once, when i told demetrius that you planned to sneak off into this forest. and i only did that because i loved demetrius so much. he followed you. and i followed him because i loved him. but he told me to get lost and threatened to hit me, kick me even kill me. now just let me go quietly back to athens. i'll carry my mistakes back with me. i won't follow you anymore. please let me go. you see how nave and foolish i've been.", "well, get out of here then! what's keeping you?", "my stupid heart, which i'm leaving behind here.", "what, you're leaving it with lysander?", "no, with demetrius.", "don't be afraid. she can't hurt you, helena.", "lysander that's right, hermia won't hurt helena even if you try to help her.", "oh, when you get her angry, she's a good fighter, and vicious too. she was a hellcat in school. and she's fierce, even though she's little.", "\"little\" again? nothing but \"little\" and \"short\"! why are you letting her insult me like this? let me at her!."], ["hermia get lost, you dwarf, you tiny little weed, you scrap, you acorn!", "you're doing too much to defend a woman who wants nothing to do with you. leave hermia alone. don't talk about helena. don't take helena's side. if you continue treating hermia so badly, you'll pay for it.", "hermia's not holding onto me anymore. follow me if you're brave enough, and we'll fight over helena.", "\"follow\"? no, i'll walk right next to you, side by side.", "all this fighting is because of you. stay where you are.", "i'm not sticking around here any more. i don't trust you. you might be a better fighter than i am, but my legs are longer and i can run away faster.", "i just can't believe any of this. i don't know what to say.", "robin this is all your fault. you make mistakes constantly, or else you cause this kind of trouble on purpose."], ["believe me, king of illusions, i made a mistake. didn't you tell me that i'd be able to recognize the man by the athenian clothes he was wearing? so far i've done exactly what i was supposed to do i put the love potion on an athenian's eyes. and so far i'm pleased with the way things have turned out, since i find all of this commotion very entertaining.", "as you can see, these lovers are looking for a place to fight. hurry up, robin, and make the night dark and cloudy. cover the sky with a low-hanging fog, as dark as hell, and get these overeager rivals so completely lost in the woods that they can't run into each other. imitate lysander's voice and egg demetrius on with insults. then rant for a while in demetrius's voice, and egg lysander on. that way you'll get them away from each other until they're so exhausted that they'll sleep like the dead. oberon robin when they're asleep, crush some of this flower's juice into lysander's eyes. the flower's juice has the power to erase all the damage that's been done to his eyes, and to make him see normally, the way he used to. when they wake up, all this trouble and conflict will seem like a dream or a meaningless vision. then the lovers will go back to athens, united together until death. while you're busy with that, i'll go see queen titania and ask her once again for the indian boy. and then i'll undo the spell that i cast over her, so she won't be in love with that monster anymore. then everything will be peaceful again."], ["we've got to act fast, my lord of the fairies. night's fading quickly, and in the distance the morning star is shining, warning us that dawn is coming. at dawn, the ghosts that have been wandering around all night go home to the graveyards. the souls of people who weren't buried in holy ground, but instead lie rotting by the side of the road or at the bottom of a river, have already gone back to their wormy graves. they weren't buried in a real graveyard because they committed suicide, and they don't want their shame to be seen in daylight, so they avoid sunlight and stay forever in the darkness of night.", "but we're not like that. we're a different kind of spirit, and we don't have to run away from the sunlight. i like the morning. i often wander around in the woods like a forest ranger until the sun rises in the fiery red sky over the ocean, turning the salty green water to gold. but you should hurry anyway. don't delay. we still have time to get all of this done before daybreak.", "up and down, up and down, i will lead them up and down. the people fear me in the country and the town. goblin, lead them up and down. here comes one of them now.", "where are you, demetrius, you arrogant bastard? say something."], ["demetrius i'm over here, you villain, with my sword out and ready to fight. where are you?", "i'm coming.", "demetrius let's go to a flatter area where we can fight more easily.", "lysander, say something! you coward, did you run away from me? say something! are you behind some bush? where are you hiding?", "lysander you coward, are you bragging to the stars and telling the bushes that you want a fight, but then you won't come and fight me? come here, you coward! come here, you child! i'll beat you with a stick. it would be shameful to fight you with a sword, the way i would fight with a real man.", "are you there?", "lysander follow my voice. this isn't a good place to fight.", "he's walking ahead of me, and he keeps daring me to follow him. when i reach the place he's calling from, he disappears. this villain is much quicker than i am. i ran after him fast, but he ran away from me faster, so that now here i am in some dark part of the forest where the ground is uneven."], ["i'll rest here. i hope the pleasant daytime comes soon! as soon as the gray light of early morning appears, i'll find demetrius and get my revenge for this insult.", "lysander ha, ha, ha! hey, you coward, why aren't you coming?", "wait for me, if you're not too scared! i know that's why you're running away from me, constantly changing places you're afraid to stand still and wait for me. you're scared to look me in the eye. where are you now?", "lysander come here. i'm over here.", "no, you're just taunting me. you'll pay for this if i ever see you face-to-face in the daylight. go wherever you want. i'm exhausted; i need to lie down and sleep on this cold ground. but watch out. i'll find you at dawn. demetrius", "oh, what a long, tedious, exhausting night! i wish it would end. i wish the comforting light of day would shine so i can go back to athens and get away from these people who hate me so much. i hope i'll be able to sleep and escape my troubles for a while. people can sometimes forget their difficulties when they're asleep. helena"], ["only three so far? we're still waiting for one more. two of both kinds makes four. ah, here she comes, angry and sad. cupid is a bad boy for making poor women go crazy like this.", "i've never been more exhausted or upset. i'm all wet from the dew and scratched up by thorns, and i can't crawl any farther. i just can't go on. my legs can't hold themselves up. i'll sleep here until morning. if they do fight, i hope lysander is safe! hermia", "sleep well there on the ground. i'll cure you, gentle lover, by putting this medicine on your eyes. robin lysander when you wake you will be truly delighted to see the woman you once loved. and when you wake up, you'll be a walking illustration of the well-known country proverb. \"jack will have jill and everything will be all right.\""], ["bottom come over here and sit down on this flowery bed while i caress those lovable cheeks. i'll put roses on your silky, smooth head and kiss your big, beautiful ears, my gentle darling.", "where's peaseblossom?", "here.", "scratch my head, peaseblossom. where's monsieur cobweb?", "here.", "monsieur cobweb, sir, get out your weapons and kill me a striped bumblebee on a thistle, and bring me its honey. don't tire yourself out, monsieur. oh, and monsieur, be careful not to break the honey-sac. i'd hate to see you drowned in honey, sir.", "where's monsieur mustardseed?", "here."], ["give me your first, mr. mustardseed. please, stop bowing, good sir.", "what would you like me to do?", "nothing, good sir, except to help sir cobweb scratch my head. i should go to the barber's, monsieur, because i think i'm getting really hairy around the face. and i'm such a sensitive ass that if my hair even tickles me a little, i need to scratch.", "would you like to hear some music, my sweet love?", "i have a pretty good ear for music. let's hear someone play the triangle and the sticks.", "or tell me, my sweet love, what you'd like to eat.", "actually, i'd like a few pounds of grass. i'd like to munch on some good dry oats. or maybe i've got a hankering for a bundle of hay. there's nothing like good hay, really sweet hay.", "i have an adventurous fairy who'll go seek out the squirrel's secret stash and get you some fresh nuts.", "i'd rather have a handful or two of dried peas. but please don't let any of your people wake me up. i really want to sleep now.", "go to sleep, and i will wrap my arms around you. fairies, go away. run off in all directions."], ["i'm putting my arms around you just like the woodbine tendril gently twists itself around the sweet honeysuckle, and like the female ivy curls itself around the branches of the elm tree. oh, how i love you! i'm so crazy about you!", "welcome, good robin. do you see this sweet sight? now i'm starting to pity titania for being so infatuated. i ran into her recently at the edge of the forest, looking for sweet presents for this hateful idiot, and i scolded her and argued with her. she had put a wreath of fresh, fragrant flowers around his hairy forehead, and the drops of dew that lay in the center of the flowers made the flowers look like they were crying with shame to be decorating the head of that ugly jackass. when i had taunted her as much as i wanted to, and she begged me very nicely to leave her alone, i asked her for the stolen indian child. she said yes right away, and sent a fairy to bring him to my home in fairyland. and now that i have the boy, i'll undo the spell that makes her vision so disgustingly wrong. and, gentle puck, take this transformed ass's head off of the head of that athenian man, so that when he wakes up at the same time as the rest of them do, they can all go back to athens. they'll only remember the events of tonight as a very unpleasant dream. but first i'll release the fairy queen from the spell."], ["be like you used to be, and see like you used to see. this bud belongs to diana, the goddess of virginity, and it has the power to undo the effects of cupid's flower. now, titania, wake up, my sweet queen.", "oberon, i've had such a strange dream! i dreamed i was in love with an ass.", "there's your boyfriend, sleeping right over there.", "how did this happen? oh, i hate looking at his face now!", "be quiet for a while. robin, take off his donkey head. titania, get the fairies to play some music, and make these five people sleep more soundly than humans have ever slept before.", "music! play the kind of music that puts people to sleep.", "bottom when you wake up, see things with your own foolish eyes again.", "play the music. take my hands, my queen, and we'll lull these people to sleep with our soft dancing. titania now that you and i are friends again, we can dance for duke theseus tomorrow at midnight, and bless his marriage and his marriage bed. these other lovers will get married alongside him, and they'll all be in high spirits."], ["listen, fairy king. i can hear the lark singing. morning's here.", "in that case, my queen, let's travel silently and solemnly across the globe to where it's still night, circling the earth faster than the moon does.", "while we're walking, you can tell me how i ended up sleeping on the ground with these humans last night.", "one of you go find the forest ranger. since we're done with the may day rites and it's still so early in the morning, my love will have a chance to hear the beautiful music of my hunting dogs barking as they chase their prey. unleash the dogs in the western valley. let them go. now go find the forest ranger.", "my beautiful queen, we'll go up the mountain and listen to the hounds as their barking echoes in the cliffs and sounds like music.", "i was with the heroes hercules and cadmus once, when their spartan hunting dogs cornered a bear. i'd never heard such impressive barking before."], ["the forests, the skies, the mountains, everything around us seemed to echo the barks of the hounds. i'd never heard such raucous music, such pleasant thunder.", "my dogs are bred from spartan hounds. they have the same folds of flesh around their mouths, the same sandy-colored fur, and hanging ears that brush the morning dew off the grass. they have crooked knees and folds of skin under their necks, just like the spartan hounds. they're not very fast in the chase, but their barking sounds like bells ringing. each bark is perfectly in tune with the others, like notes on a scale. no one, anywhere, has ever gone hunting with a more musical pack of dogs. judge for yourself when you hear them. but wait a minute! who are these women?", "my lord, that's my daughter asleep on the ground over there, and this is lysander here, and this is demetrius, and this is helena, old nedar's daughter. i don't understand why they're all here together.", "they probably woke up early to celebrate may day and came here for my celebration when they heard i'd be here. but tell me, egeus. isn't today the day when hermia has to tell us her decision about whether she'll marry demetrius?", "it is, my lord.", "go tell the hunters to blow their horns and wake them up.", "good morning, my friends. valentine's day is over."], ["are you lovebirds only starting to pair up now?", "forgive us, my lord.", "please, all of you, stand up.", "lysander demetrius i know you two are enemies. has the world really become so gentle and peaceful that people who hate each other have started to trust each other and sleep beside each other without being afraid?", "my lord, what i say may be a little confused, since i'm half asleep and half awake. i swear, at the moment i really couldn't tell you how i ended up here. but i think i want to tell you the truth, and now that i think about it, i think this is true i came here with hermia. we were planning to leave athens to escape the athenian law and", "theseus enough, enough, my lord. you've heard enough evidence! i insist that the law punish him they were going to run away, demetrius, they were running away to defeat us, robbing you of your wife and me of my fatherly right to decide who my son-in-law will be.", "theseus my lord, the beautiful helena told me about their secret plan to escape into this forest. i was furious and followed them here, and the lovely helena was so in love with me that she followed me."], ["i'm not sure how it happened but somehow, something made my love for hermia melt away like snow. my past love for hermia now seems like a memory of some cheap toy i used to love as a child. now the only person i love, and believe in, and want to look at, is helena. i was engaged to her before i ever met hermia. then i hated her for a time, as a sick person hates the food he usually loves. but now i have my natural taste back, like a sick person when he recovers. now i want helena, i love her, i long for her, and i will always be true to her.", "you pretty lovers are lucky you met me here. we'll talk more about this later. egeus, i'm overriding your wishes. these couples will be married along with me and hippolyta in the temple later today. and now, since the morning is almost over, we'll give up on the idea of hunting. come with us to athens. we three couples will celebrate with a sumptuous feast. come, hippolyta.", "what exactly just happened? the events of last night seem small and hard to see clearly, like far-off mountains that look like clouds in the distance.", "yes, it's like my eyes are out of focus, and i'm seeing everything double.", "me too."], ["i won demetrius so easily, as if he were a precious diamond i just found lying around. it's mine because i found it, but i feel like someone else could easily come and claim it was hers.", "are you sure we're awake? it seems to me like we're still sleeping, still dreaming. do you remember seeing the duke here? did he tell us to follow him?", "yes, he did. and my father was here too.", "and hippolyta.", "and he told us to follow him to the temple.", "well, then, we're awake. let's follow him. we can tell one another our dreams along the way.", "tell me when my cue comes, and i'll say my line. my next cue is \"most handsome pyramus.\" hey! peter quince? flute the bellows-repairman? snout the handyman? starveling? my god, they've all run away and left me sleeping here? what a weird dream i had. you can't even describe such a weird dream. you'd be an ass if you even tried to explain it. i thought i was no, nobody can even describe what i was. i thought i was, i thought i had but a person would be an idiot to try to say what i thought i had. no eye has ever heard, no ear has ever seen, no hand has tasted, or tongue felt, or heart described what my dream was like. i'll get peter quince to write this dream down as a ballad."], ["i'll call it \"bottom's dream\" because it's so deep that it has no bottom. and i'll sing it for the duke in the intermission of a play. or maybe, to make it even more lovely, i'll sing it when the heroine dies."], ["have you sent anyone to bottom's house? has he come home yet?", "no one's heard from him. i'm sure he's been kidnapped.", "if he doesn't show up, the play is ruined. it won't go on. will it?", "no, it would be impossible. he's the only person in athens who can play pyramus.", "definitely. he's quite simply the smartest working-man in athens.", "yes, and the best looking too. and his voice is the paramour of sweetness.", "you mean \"paragon.\" a is something bad.", "the duke's leaving the temple. two or three more lords and ladies have been married too. if we'd been able to put on our play, we would have had it made.", "oh that great, funny guy, bottom! he would have gotten a pension of six pence a day for his whole life. six pence a day would've been forced on him. i'll be damned if the duke wouldn't have given him six pence a day for playing pyramus."], ["and he would have deserved it too. pyramus is worth or it's worth nothing!", "where are my guys? where are my good fellows?", "bottom! oh, how wonderful to see you! oh, what a relief!", "my friends, i've got some amazing things to tell you but don't ask me to tell you what. i swear by my athenian citizenship that i won't tell you anything. i'll tell you everything exactly as it happened.", "tell us, bottom.", "no, you won't get a word out of me. all i'll tell you is that the duke has had dinner already. now it's time to get your costumes together. find some good strings for tying on your false beards, and grab new ribbons to decorate your shoes. meet me at the palace as soon as possible. look over your lines again. our play's going to be performed for the duke! so make sure thisbe's wearing clean underwear, and make sure whoever's playing the lion doesn't cut his nails, because he needs them long to look like lion's claws. and no one eat any onions or garlic. if we have sweet-smelling breath, i'm sure they'll say \"it's a sweet play.\" now no more talking. get busy, go!"], ["these lovers are saying some strange things, theseus.", "yes, strange and totally made up too. i'll never believe any of these old legends or fairy tales. lovers and madmen hallucinate about things that sane people just can't understand. lunatics, lovers, and poets all are ruled by their overactive imaginations. some people think they see devils and monsters everywhere and they're lunatics. lovers are just as crazy, and think a dark-skinned gypsy is the most gorgeous woman in the world. poets are always looking around like they're having a fit, confusing the mundane with the otherworldly, and describing things in their writing that simply don't exist. all these people have such strong imaginations that, when they feel happy, they assume a god or some other supernatural being is bringing that happiness to them. or if they're afraid of something at night, they look at the shrubbery and imagine it's a wild bear!", "but the story that these lovers are telling, and the fact that they all saw and heard exactly the same things, make me think there's more going on here than imaginary fantasies. their story is bizarre and astounding, but it's solid and consistent."], ["here come the lovers, laughing happily. i wish you joy, my friends! i hope the days ahead are full of joy for you.", "we wish you even more joy, and hope joy comes to you in your royal walks, at your table, and in your royal bed!", "now, what kind of entertainment do we have to fill up the long three hours between dinner and bedtime? where is our entertainment director? what performances have been prepared? aren't there any plays for us to enjoy while we wait in torture for bedtime to come? let me see philostrate.", "here i am, theseus.", "tell us what entertainment you've prepared for the evening. which plays, what music? how will we pass the time without some entertainment?", "theseus here's a list of all of the acts that have been prepared. choose which one you want to see first.", "\"the battle between hercules and the centaurs, to be sung by an athenian eunuch, accompanied by a harp.\" no, we won't see that. i've already told that story to hippolyta, while praising my cousin hercules. what else? \"the riot of the drunk bacchanals who rip the singer orpheus to shreds.\" that's an old show, and i saw it the last time i came back from conquering"], ["thebes. \"the nine muses mourning the death of learning and scholarship.\" that's some sharp, critical satire, and it's not appropriate for a wedding. \"a tedious short drama about young pyramus and his love thisbe, a very sad and tragic comedy.\" a sad comedy? short but still tedious? that's like hot ice and strange snow. how can this drama be so many contradictory things?", "it's a play about ten words long, which is the shortest play i've ever heard of. but in my opinion, it's about ten words too long. that's why it's tedious. in the entire play, not one word is well-written, and not one of the actors is right for his part. it's tragic because pyramus kills himself. i have to admit that when i saw his suicide during rehearsal, i had tears in my eyes but they were tears of laughter.", "who are the actors?", "rough workmen from athens who never spent much time thinking. now they've worn out their out-of-shape brains to put on this play for your wedding.", "so let's see it.", "no, my noble lord. this play isn't right for you. i've seen the whole thing, and it's completely worthless unless you think their bad acting and their misremembered lines which they memorized so painfully are funny."], ["i'll watch this play. nothing can really be bad when it's created by simple people who try hard. come on, bring them in. and sit down, ladies.", "i don't like seeing poor people overburdened or looking bad when they're trying to do something good.", "you won't see anything like that, sweetheart.", "he just said that they're no good at acting.", "then we're even kinder people for thanking them for something that they're not good at. we'll entertain ourselves by accepting their mistakes. when poor dutiful people can't do certain things well, generous people can consider the effort they put into it rather than the effect that they produce. in my travels, great scholars have come up to me, meaning to greet me with well-rehearsed welcoming speeches, and i have seen them tremble and turn pale, and pause inappropriately in the middle of their sentences, and botch their well-rehearsed tones of voice because they're so nervous, and then break off abruptly at the end, without actually welcoming me. trust me, my sweet, i figured out that they were trying to welcome me even though they were silent, and that message was as clear from someone who was modest and nervously dutiful as it is from someone who is loud and audacious and eloquent. therefore, love and tongue-tied simplicity can say the most even when they're saying the least, in my opinion."], ["your grace, the person who is going to deliver the prologue is ready.", "let him come forward.", "if we happen to offend you, it's because we want to. we don't want you to think we came here to offend you, except that we want to offend you with our good intentions. our plan to show off our little bit of talent will wind up getting us executed. please keep in mind we're only here out of spite. we don't come here with the intention of making you happy. we're absolutely not here to delight you. the actors are ready to come out and make you sorry. by watching their show, you'll find out everything you're likely to know.", "this guy doesn't pay much attention to punctuation.", "he rode that prologue like a wild horse. he didn't know how to stop it. the moral of this story is that it's not enough to speak; you have to speak grammatically.", "yes, he performed his prologue like a child plays a recorder he can make sounds, but they're out of control."], ["his speech was like a tangled chain. it went on and on and was a total mess. who's next?", "quince ladies and gentlemen, perhaps you are wondering what is going on. well, keep wondering, until the truth makes everything clear. this man is pyramus, if you want to know. this beautiful lady is definitely thisbe. this man with the limestone and cement is portraying wall, that horrible wall that kept these lovers apart. they are content to whisper through wall's little hole, the poor souls, and no one should be surprised. this man, with his lantern, dog, and thornbush, portrays moonshine, because, if you want to know, the lovers were not ashamed to meet each other by moonshine at ninus's tomb in order to carry on their courtship. this grisly beast, which is called \"lion,\" scared away, or rather frightened, the faithful thisbe when she arrived at the meeting place at night. as she ran away from him, she dropped her cloak, which the horrible lion stained with his bloody mouth. soon pyramus comes along, a tall and handsome young man, and finds his faithful thisbe's cloak to be dead. at this point, he takes his sword, his bloody blameful blade, and bravely breaks open his boiling bloody breast. and thisbe, hiding in the shade of the mulberry bushes, took his dagger and killed herself. for the rest of the story, let lion, moonshine, wall, and the two lovers talk more about it, since they're standing here."], ["i wonder if the lion's going to talk.", "it wouldn't surprise me, my lord. if these asses can speak, a lion should be able to.", "snout at this point i, snout, play a wall. but not just any wall. i want you to understand that i'm pretending to be a kind of wall that has a little hole in it. the lovers pyramus and thisbe often whispered very secretly through that hole. this clay, this cement, and this stone that i'm carrying around show that i'm that wall. it's the truth. and this is the crack, right side and left side , through which the frightened lovers will be whispering.", "can you imagine cement and stone talking better?", "it's the smartest partition i've ever heard speak, my lord.", "pyramus is coming up to the wall. be quiet!", "bottom oh, grim-looking night! oh, night that is so black in color! oh night, which is always there when it is not day! oh night! oh night! so sad, sad, sad,"], ["i'm afraid my thisbe has forgotten her promise! and you, oh wall, oh sweet, oh lovely wall, you stand between her father's property and mine, you wall, oh wall, oh sweet and lovely wall. show me your hole to stick my eye up against!", "thank you, you're such a polite wall. god bless you for doing this. but what's this i see? i don't see any thisbe. oh wicked wall, through which i don't see any happiness! damn your stones for disappointing me like this!", "since the wall is conscious, it should curse back at him.", "no, actually, sir, he shouldn't say anything. it's not his turn, it's thisbe's. \"disappointing me like this\" is thisbe's cue. she's supposed to enter now, and i'll see her through the wall. you'll see, it'll happen exactly like i say. here she comes.", "flute oh wall, you've often heard me moaning because you keep me separated from my handsome pyramus! my cherry lips have often kissed your bricks, which are stuck together with cement.", "i see a voice! i'll go to the hole to see if i can hear my thisbe's face. thisbe?", "you are my love, my love, i think."], ["i'm your love, no matter what you think. and i'm still faithful to you, just like the famous .", "and i'll be as faithful to you as , until the day i die.", "not even shafalus was as faithful to his lover procrus as i am to you.", "me too, i'm as faithful as .", "oh, kiss me through the hole in this nasty wall.", "but i'm only kissing the wall's hole, not your lips at all.", "will you meet me right away at ninny's grave?", "neither death nor life will stop me from coming.", "i, wall, have done my part. now that i'm done, wall can go away."], ["the lovers should've waited around a little longer the wall between them is down now.", "what can you do? that's what happens with talking walls.", "this is the silliest thing i've ever seen.", "the best plays are still only illusions, and the worst are just as good, if you just use your imagination to fill them in.", "in that case it's your imagination that's interesting, not the play.", "if we imagine these guys as they imagine themselves, then they're first-class actors. look, here come two noble animals, a man and a lion.", "snug you, ladies, whose gentle hearts make you afraid of the smallest monstrous mouse that crawls around on the floor, might quake and tremble now when the wild lion roars in his most violent rage. you should know that i, snug the carpenter, am not a fierce lion or a lioness, because if i were a lion and i showed up here to cause trouble, i'd be taking my life in my hands.", "ah, it's a sensitive animal, with a good conscience.", "he's the best actor i've ever seen play a lion."], ["he's as brave as a fox.", "true. and as wise as a goose.", "oh, that's not true, my lord. he's not brave enough to be wise.", "he's not wise enough to be brave. anyway, he is what he is. let's listen to the moon.", "this lantern represents the", "he should have worn the", "he's not a crescent moon, so his horns must be invisible inside the circle.", "this lantern represents the moon. i myself am playing the man in the moon", "well then, that's the biggest mistake of all. the man should be inside the lantern. how else is he the \"man in the moon\"?", "he can't go in there because of the candle. it's too hot.", "i'm tired of this moon. i wish he'd wax or wane off the stage.", "it seems like he's waning, but out of politeness we'll have to wait and see."], ["go ahead, moon.", "all i wanted to tell you is that the lantern is the moon, i'm the man in the moon, this thornbush is my thornbush, and this dog is my dog.", "well, all of these should be in the lantern, because they're all in the moon. but be quiet, here comes thisbe.", "this is old ninny's tomb. but where is my love?", "hey!", "good roaring, lion!", "good running, thisbe!", "good shining, moon! really, the moon shines very well.", "that's good, lion! shake it around like a cat with a mouse."], ["and then pyramus showed up.", "so the lion disappeared.", "sweet moon, i thank you for your sunny beams. i thank you, moon, for shining now so bright, because by the light of your gracious, golden, glittering gleams, i hope to be able to see my faithful thisbe. but wait. oh no! but, look, poor me, what a terrible tragedy is here! eyes, do you see? how can it be? oh, dainty duck! oh, dear! your cloak so good, what, stained with blood? come, terrible furies, and punish whoever has hurt her! oh, fate, come and cut the thread of my life. conquer, crush, conclude, and kill!", "you could get sad watching this actor's passionate lament if one of your good friends happened to die right at the same time.", "damned if i don't feel sorry for him.", "oh, mother nature, why did you create lions? a mean and awful lion has my darling, who is no, no, who was the most beautiful lady who ever lived, or loved, or liked, or looked. come on, tears, pour over me! come on out, sword, and wound pyramus in the chest yes, right here on the left side where his heart is. pyramus"], ["and so i'm dying. here i go, here i go. okay, now i'm dead. my soul has fled to the sky. my tongue shall see no more, it's time for the moon to go away.", "now die, die, die, die, die. pyramus", "is someone throwing dice? i guess it's \"die,\" not dice, since there's only one of him.", "actually he's a die with no dots, since he's nothing he's dead.", "with a doctor's help he might recover and become an ass again.", "if moonshine's gone before thisbe comes back, how will she be able to see in the dark to find her lover dead?", "she'll see him by starlight. here she comes. her moaning and groaning will end the play.", "i don't think a ridiculous pyramus like that one deserves much moaning. i hope she keeps it short.", "i can't decide whether pyramus or thisbe is better. god help us if he's a better man. but god help us if she's a better woman."], ["look, she's spotted him with those sweet eyes of hers.", "and now she'll start moaning, of course", "are you asleep, my love? what, are you dead, my dove? oh, pyramus, get up! speak, speak. can't you talk? dead, dead? the dirt of a grave must cover your sweet eyes! your lily-white lips, your cherry-red nose, and your buttercup-yellow cheeks are gone, gone forever. lovers, moan and weep. his eyes were as green as leeks. oh, fate, come, come to me, with hands as pale as milk. soak your hands in blood and gore, since you have cut the thread of his life with scissors. tongue, do not speak. come, trusty sword. come, blade, drench my breast with blood. goodbye, friends! this is how thisbe comes to an end. goodbye, goodbye, goodbye. thisbe", "moonshine and lion are left to bury the dead.", "yes, and wall too."], ["no, i assure you. the wall that kept their fathers apart has been taken down. would you like to see the epilogue or hear a country dance between two of us?", "no epilogue, please. your play doesn't need to be excused afterward with an epilogue. never apologize when the actors are all dead, no one can be blamed. as a matter of fact, if the playwright had played pyramus and hanged himself with thisbe's belt, it would have been a very good tragedy. it's a good tragedy, very well done. but come on, let's see you do your dance. forget your epilogue.", "the clock has chimed midnight. lovers, it's time to go to bed. it's almost fairy time. i'm afraid we're going to oversleep in the morning as late as we've stayed up tonight.this blatantly stupid play helped us kill the time until bed. dear friends, let's go to bed. we'll continue this celebration for two weeks, with nightly parties and new fun.", "now the hungry lion roars and the wolf howls at the moon. the farmer snores, exhausted from his work. the charred logs glow in the fireplace, and the owl's hoot makes the sick man think about his own death. now is the time of night when graves open wide and release spirits to glide over the graveyard paths."], ["and we fairies, who run away from the sun just like the goddess of the night, following darkness like a dream, are getting antsy. but i'm here to make sure that not even a mouse disturbs this blessed house. i've been sent to clean house a bit before the fairies come.", "let the dying fire shine a glimmering light throughout the house. i want every elf and fairy to hop lightly, like a bird on a twig, and to sing and dance this song along with me.", "first rehearse your song from memory, and make sure each note is pretty. we'll all join hands and sing, and bless this place with our fairy grace.", ""], ["", "if we actors have offended you, just think of it this way and everything will be all right you were asleep when you saw these visions, and this silly and pathetic story was no more real than a dream. ladies and gentlemen, don't get upset with me. if you forgive us, we'll make everything all right. i'm an honest puck, and i swear that if we're lucky enough not to get hissed at, we'll make it up to you soon. if not, then i'm a liar. so good night to everyone. give me some applause, if we're friends, and robin will make everything up to you."]], [["according to this letter, pedro of aragon and his army are coming to messina tonight.", "he must be very near by now. when i left him, he was less than nine miles from here.", "how many noblemen were killed in the battle you just fought?", "not many, and no one important.", "a victory in battle is twice as victorious when all the soldiers return home safely. this letter also says that don pedro has given honors to a young man from florence named claudio.", "claudio deserves to be honored, and don pedro has rewarded him accordingly. claudio has done more than anyone would expect of a man his age. he looks like a lamb but fights like a lion. he has so greatly exceeded all expectations that i can't even describe all he's done.", "he has an uncle here in messina who will be glad to hear this news."], ["i have delivered some letters to his uncle, and he seemed very happy. he got so emotional that he actually looked like he was in pain.", "did he start weeping?", "yes, heavily.", "that's a very natural display of affection. there's no face more sincere than one washed in tears. and it's definitely better to cry because you're happy than laugh because you're sad!", "please tell me, has signior returned from battle?", "i don't know anyone with that name, ma'am. there was no signior montanto in our army.", "who are you talking about, niece?", "my cousin means signior benedick of padua.", "oh, yes, benedick has returned and is as cheerful as ever.", "once put up a public notice in messina challenging cupid to an archery match. my uncle's jester accepted the contest on cupid's behalf but used toy arrows at the shooting match. but tell me, how many men did he kill and eat in this battle? i promised him i would eat anyone he killed."], ["for god's sake, beatrice, you're criticizing signior benedick too heavily. but i'm sure he'll get even with you.", "signior benedick served well in the war, my lady.", "you had rotten food, and he helped you eat it. he's a very brave eater he has a strong stomach.", "he's a good soldier too, lady.", "he's a good soldier to a lady? well then, what is he to a lord?", "he's a lord to a lord and a man to a man. he is positively stuffed with honorable virtues.", "absolutely he is stuffed, like a dummy. as for what he's stuffed with well, nobody's perfect.", "please don't take my niece the wrong way, sir. benedick and beatrice have been waging a war of wits between themselves. whenever they meet, there's a little battle.", "and i always win. the last time we fought, he was so dazed by the end that he wasn't much smarter than his horse. so tell me, who is he hanging around with these days? every month he has a new best friend.", "is that possible?"], ["it's entirely possible. he's incredibly fickle his affection changes faster than the latest fashions.", "i can see you don't like this gentleman.", "no, absolutely not. but please tell me, who's his best friend? isn't there some new swaggering young ruffian who will happily go to hell with benedick?", "he spends most of his time with the good, noble claudio.", "oh god, benedick will plague him like a disease! benedick is an infection that's easy to catch but hard to get rid of and he'll drive you crazy once you've been infected. god help claudio! if he's caught the benedick, he'll lose all his money before he's cured.", "i'm going to make sure i stay on your good side, lady.", "do that, my friend.", "you will never fall victim to benedick's charms, my niece.", "no, not until we see a hot january.", "don pedro is here.", "my dear signior leonato, hosting my whole army is such a huge burden, but you accept it and me with open arms. most people choose to avoid trouble, but you run to it."], ["you are never trouble to this house, your grace. it's comforting when trouble departs. but when leave, you take happiness with you and leave sorrow in its place.", "you take up your duties too cheerfully. hero this must be your daughter.", "that's what her mother always tells me.", "did you doubt that she was your daughter, since you had to ask her mother?", "of course not, signior benedick. you were only a child when my daughter was born, and not yet old enough to seduce my wife.", "ah, he got you back, benedick! leonato clearly knows your reputation with women. seriously, though, the lady resembles leonato so much that there can be no doubt about who her father is. congratulations, lady: you resemble a most honorable man.", "well, even if he is her father, i'm sure she wouldn't want to have the head of the old man on her shoulders!", "i'm amazed you're still talking, signior benedick. no one's listening to you.", "look, it's my dear lady disdain! aren't you dead yet?"], ["how could disdain die when you're here? when you're around, even lady courtesy becomes lady disdain.", "that makes lady courtesy a traitor. all ladies love me, except you. it's too bad i'm so hard-hearted, because i really don't love anyone.", "women are lucky, then. you would make a nasty suitor. thankfully, i feel the same way you do. i have no need for romance. i would rather listen to my dog bark at a crow than hear a man swear that he loves me.", "well, i hope you stay in that frame of mind or some poor man will end up with his face all scratched up.", "if he has a face like yours, a good scratching couldn't make him look any worse.", "listen to you, instructing me like a parrot would.", "i'd rather be a squawking bird than an animal like you.", "i wish my horse moved as fast as your mouth and was as tireless. that's it i'm done.", "you always slip out of the argument like this. i know you from before.", "and that's everything, leonato. claudio, benedick my dear friend leonato has invited you all to stay here at messina. i told him we'll stay for at least a month, and he says that he hopes we'll stay longer. i think he's actually serious, and not just being polite."], ["i am being serious, my lord. don john i welcome you here as well. now that you and your brother have made friends again, i owe you the same allegiance i owe don pedro.", "thank you. i'm not a man who talks a lot, but i thank you.", "if it pleases you, your highness, will you lead us all inside?", "give me your hand, leonato. we will go in together.", "benedick, did you notice signior leonato's daughter?", "i saw her, but i didn't notice her.", "isn't she a well-mannered young lady?", "do you want my true opinion? or do you want me to criticize her like i do all women?", "no, please, speak seriously.", "well, it seems to me that she is too short to be praised highly, too dark to be praised fairly, and too small to be praised greatly. i can only say this about her: if she looked different than she does, she would be ugly, and since she can't be anything but herself, i don't like her.", "you think i'm kidding. please tell me seriously what you think of her."], ["are you thinking of buying her? is that why you're asking?", "would it even be possible to buy a jewel as rare and precious as hero?", "yes, and you could buy a case to put it in, too. but tell me, are you speaking seriously? or are you just teasing? if i'm going to sing along with you, i need to know what key you're singing in.", "i think she's the most wonderful woman i've ever laid eyes on.", "i'm still young enough to see without glasses, and i don't see what you're talking about. if her cousin beatrice didn't have such a nasty temper, she'd be so much more beautiful than hero that it would be like comparing may to december. but, hey, this doesn't mean you're looking to get married, does it?", "even if i had sworn never to marry, i wouldn't trust myself to keep that promise if hero would marry me.", "what's going on these days? isn't there one man left in the world who knows not to take a wife? she's just going to cheat on him. will i never see a sixty-year old bachelor again or will all men be swindled into marriage while they're young? go ahead, then, if you have to yoke yourself to marriage, like an ox carrying his load, and throw away your free time. look, don pedro has come back for you."], ["what secrets between you have kept you from following us to leonato's?", "your highness will have to force me to tell.", "your loyalty to me requires you to tell me what you've been talking about.", "look, claudio, i can keep secrets like a mute; i want you to know that. but i owe don pedro my allegiance look, i to tell him don pedro claudio is in love. with whom? that's what you're supposed to ask me next, your grace. look how short the answer is with hero, leonato's short daughter.", "if you say so.", "listen to him deny it, like that man in the old tale \"mr. fox\": \"it isn't true and wasn't true and god forbid it should be so.\"", "unless my feelings change very soon, i have to admit it's true.", "it's good if you love hero, because she's worthy of your love.", "you're trying to trick me, my lord.", "i swear, i'm telling you what i honestly think.", "and i swear i spoke honestly to benedick i am in love with hero."], ["and swear all up and down i spoke honestly when i said that this was a horrible idea.", "i feel that i love her.", "i know that she is worthy of that love.", "i, on the other hand, don't how she could be loved and don't how she could be worthy. even fire can't melt that opinion out of me. you could burn me at the stake, and i'd still think this.", "you never did believe in the power of beauty.", "or in the power of reason.", "i was conceived by a woman, and i thank her very much for all her effort. and then she brought me up, and i thank her for that, too. but all the other women will have to forgive me for not being willing to be made a fool of cheated on by a wife. i don't want to insult any particular woman by doubting and mistrusting her, so i'll just avoid them all. and the conclusion of this is that i'll live as a bachelor and, with the money i save, dress better.", "i swear, before i die i'm going to see you sick with love.", "with anger, with fever, or with hunger, sure, my friend, but never sick with love. if you can prove that i'll ever be so in love that i can't be brought to my senses with a good round of beers, you can pluck out my eyes with a love-poet's pen and hang me on a brothel's door where the picture of blind cupid usually goes."], ["i'll be sure to remember this fuss you've made, in case you ever do fall in love. that'll be news.", "if i ever change my mind, you can use me for target practice. and whoever hits the bull's eye gets to be a hero.", "well, time will tell. even the most savage bull is eventually domesticated.", "maybe the bull is, but if am ever domesticated, you can take that bull's horns and put them right on my forehead, as my wife is sure to cuckold me soon enough. you might as well hang a big sign with enormous lettering around my neck. but instead of it saying \"horse for hire,\" it will say \"take a look at benedick, the married man.\"", "if that ever happened, you'd go absolutely mad.", "well, if cupid hasn't used up all his arrows in venice, where the courtesans are famous for making men lovesick, he'll get you to quiver and shake. just you wait.", "that's about as likely as an earthquake.", "oh, you'll soften as time passes. while you're waiting for that to happen, though, hurry to leonato's. give him my respects, and tell him i'll definitely be there for dinner, since i know he has gone to great lengths for this meal.", "i think i can handle this mission. and so i commit you"], ["\"into god's hands. from my house, if i had a house \"", "\"the sixth of july. sincerely, your loving friend, benedick.\"", "oh, stop joking around. you know, sometimes you two dress up your conversation with flimsy little bits of wit that don't hold together too well. before you make of everyone else, look at yourselves in the mirror! and with that, i'm leaving.", "my lord, you could really help me out now.", "i am at your service. just tell me what you want me to do, and however hard it is, you'll see that i'm eager to do it.", "does leonato have a son, my lord?", "hero is his only child, and his only heir. do you like her, claudio?", "oh, my lord, when we left messina to fight the war, i looked at hero with the eyes of a soldier. i liked what i saw, but my mind was so occupied with the rough, violent task ahead of me that there was no chance that would turn into . but now that i'm back, the room in my head that i used to fill with war plans has become crowded with soft and delicate feelings. they all lead me to the same thought how beautiful young hero is and how i must have liked her even before i left to fight."], ["you will become a true lover soon, and exhaust your friends with your endless chatter about your feelings. look, if you really love the beautiful hero, enjoy it. i will speak to her and her father about the matter, and i'll convince leonato to promise hero to you. isn't that the reason you told me all this?", "you can see that i'm sick with love, and you're taking care of me in just the right way! but i didn't want you to think that i'm hasty in my emotions. i was going to explain my feelings with a longer story.", "why speak longer than you have to? that's like building a bridge wider than the river it crosses. whatever gets the job done is best. you love hero; that's all i need to know to want to find a remedy. they're going to have a costume party with dancing tonight. i'll disguise myself as you and pour out \"my\" feelings to hero, taking her prisoner with the force of my love story. then i'll talk to her father. and in the end, she's yours! let's get started right away."], ["hey, brother. tell me, where is my nephew, your son? has he taken care of the music?", "he is taking care of it as we speak. but brother, i have some strange news for you.", "is it good news?", "well, it seems like good news. a servant of mine overheard the prince and claudio talking as they walked through my orchard. the prince said that he is in love with hero, your daughter, and that he is going to tell her so at the dance tonight. if he she wants to marry him, too, he's going to find you and ask for her hand immediately.", "is this servant of yours a smart man?", "he's very bright. i'll get him to come here, and you can ask him yourself."], ["no, no, until it comes true we'll pretend it was just a dream we had. but my daughter should know about this, so she can be prepared with an answer just in case. go to her and tell her for me.", "cousins, you all have work to do. oh, i beg your pardon. come with me now, and help me out. dear cousin, please be careful during this busy time."], ["really, my lord, why are you so excessively sad?", "the things that cause my sadness are without limit. therefore my sadness is without limit.", "you should listen to reason. then you'd stop being so gloomy.", "and after i have sat and listened to reason, what's my prize?", "if not an end to your suffering, then at least you'll have the means to endure it patiently.", "i'm amazed that you being such a moody man yourself are moralizing about my deadly condition. i can't hide what i am. i'll be sad when i have reason to be sad and won't smile at anybody's jokes. i'll eat when i'm hungry and won't wait until it's convenient. i'll sleep when i'm tired and won't rouse myself for anything. i'll laugh when i'm happy and won't flatter and fawn over anyone.", "sure, but don't do it at full volume until there's no danger in it. not long ago you challenged and opposed your brother, and it is only very recently that he has forgiven you. you need to act carefully if you're going to stay in his good graces. you have to wait for the appropriate time to let loose."], ["i'd rather be a weed in a hedge than a rose in my brother's garden. it suits me more to be hated by everyone than to put on a fancy show and trick people into loving me. though i am not a flattering, righteous man, at least you can say that i am honest about being a villain. my brother trusts me now? yeah as much as a master trusts the dog he muzzles or the peasant he \"frees\" by chaining a big block around the man's foot. if my mouth were unrestrained, i'd bite. if i were free, i'd do what i pleased. until that happens, let me be who i am and don't try to change me.", "can't you somehow use your dissatisfaction to your own advantage?", "i use it all the time, since it's all that i have. who's that?", "what's going on, borachio?", "i just came from a great feast where leonato is entertaining the prince, your brother. i can give you information about an intended marriage.", "will this give me an opportunity to make some mischief? who is this fool who wants all the fuss of marriage?", "your brother's right-hand man.", "who? that pretty boy, claudio?", "that's the one."], ["he's a very fancy gentleman. and who's the girl who has caught his eye?", "hero, the daughter and heir of leonato.", "a lively young one! how did you learn about this?", "i was hired to perfume all the rooms in leonato's house. as i was working on one musty room, the prince and claudio entered. they were in the middle of a serious conversation. i quickly hid behind a tapestry and heard them agree that the prince would court hero tonight at the dance and, once he won her consent to marry, would give her to claudio.", "come, let's go to the dance. this just may cheer me up. claudio, the young upstart, was responsible for keeping me from gaining power over my brother. if there's any way i can spoil his life, i'll be overjoyed. you'll both help me, right?", "until the day we die, my lord.", "let's go to this great feast. they'll be even happier now that my mood has lightened. it's too bad the cook doesn't think like me; she would have poisoned them all if she did. should we go check out the scene?", "lead the way, sir."], ["wasn't don john at dinner tonight?", "i didn't see him.", "that man always looks so sour! just looking at him gives me heartburn.", "he has a very gloomy attitude.", "it would be excellent if they could make a man halfway between don john and benedick. one of them is too much like a painting of a man he never speaks and the other is too much like a spoiled little boy, always chattering.", "so, the man would talk half as much as benedick and be half as serious as don john", "and if he were handsome, agile, and rich, too, he could have any woman in the world all he'd need was her good will.", "really, niece, you'll never get a husband if you keep saying such harsh things about people.", "honestly, she is too ill-tempered."], ["being \"too ill-tempered\" is different from being simply \"ill-tempered,\" right? so i suppose that means i can escape god's punishment, for in the old proverb, it is said that \"god gives an ill-tempered cow short horns\" so that she can't inflict damage on anyone. but it doesn't say anything about a cow that is ill-tempered.", "so then, for being too argumentative, god won't send you any horns?", ". i pray every morning and night that the lord won't send me a husband. really, i couldn't stand a husband with a beard. i'd rather be wrapped in scratchy blankets all night.", "maybe you will find a husband without a beard.", "and then what would i do with him? dress him up in my clothes and pretend he's my lady servant? if he has a beard, he's more than a boy; if he doesn't have a beard, he's less than a man. if he's more than a boy, he's not the one for me, and if he's less than a man, i'm not the one for him. they say that women who die unmarried are destined to lead the apes to hell, and i suppose that'll be my fate as well.", "so you'll go to hell?", "no, just to the gates of hell, where the devil will meet me, with the horns on his head like a cuckold, and say, \"go up to heaven, beatrice. hell is no place for you virgins.\" so i'll fly up to heaven (leaving the apes behind) where i'll be met by saint peter guarding heaven's gates. he will show me the part of heaven where the bachelors sit, and i'll have fun there forever."], ["hero well, niece, i trust that you will defer to your father on these important decisions.", "surely, my cousin has a duty to please her father. but if the husband her father chooses isn't handsome, she should sweetly tell her father that she will please herself with another one.", "well, niece, i hope that i will see you married one day.", "no, i won't take a husband until they make men out of something other than dirt. what woman wouldn't be distressed, being lorded over by a handful of dust? can you imagine being hitched to a lump of clay? no, uncle, i won't be married. and anyhow, if is the father of all mankind, then his sons are my brothers, and really i believe that incest is a sin.", "hero daughter, remember what i told you. if the prince asks for your hand in marriage, you know what to tell him.", "but cousin, make sure he woos you properly and appropriately. if he is too insistent, tell him that romance is like a dance: it has its own rhythm and timing. look, the three stages of romance are like three different dances. the wooing is like a scottish jig: hot and fast and full of whimsy and illusion. the wedding is a like a dance you would do before the king: proper and decorous. finally, you get to the part where you regret having gotten married in the first place. it is like the lively : it goes faster and faster until you eventually topple over and die."], ["niece, you are exceptionally perceptive.", "i have a good eye, uncle. i can see what's in broad daylight.", "the partygoers have arrived. let's give them room.", "my lady, will you have a dance with me?", "as long as you move gracefully, look handsome, and say nothing, i'm yours for the dance. and i'll even linger after i've gone.", "will i be with you then?", "perhaps, if i decide to let you.", "and when will that be?", "when i like the way you look, for god forbid your face be as ugly as your mask!", "my mask is like the roof of the poor humble cottage; underneath the mask, i am as magnificent as the glorious god jove."], ["well, then, since philemon's roof was thatched with straw, your mask should have a beard.", "if you wish to speak of love, speak more softly.", "well, i wish you liked me.", "i'm glad i don't, for your sake. i have many awful qualities.", "tell me one.", "i say my prayers out loud.", "that makes me love you even more. everyone who hears you can shout, \"amen.\"", "god give me a good dance partner!", "amen. that would be me.", "and god take him away from me when we're finished dancing! go ahead say \"amen.\"", "no more talking. i've got my answer.", "i know who you are; you are signior antonio.", "no, really, i'm not.", "i can tell by the way you waggle your head."], ["really, i'm only pretending to be him.", "you could only imitate his imperfections so well if you were the man himself. look, you've got his wrinkled hands. you are antonio, you are he.", "in short, i'm not.", "come on, do you think i can't recognize you by your excellent wit? can a good thing hide itself? be quiet, you are antonio. a man's virtues will always show themselves, and that's the end of that.", "won't you tell me who told you that?", "no, you'll have to excuse me.", "and you won't tell me who you are?", "not now.", "who said that i was disdainful, and that i got all my best lines out of a bad joke book?! well, it must have been signior benedick.", "who's that?", "i'm sure you know him.", "no i don't, believe me.", "what, he never made you laugh?"], ["please tell me, who is this man?", "why, he's the prince's fool, and a very dull fool at that. his only talent is his capacity to come up with unbelievable slanders. only the most immoral people enjoy his company, and they like him not for his wit but his outrageousness. he manages to both please and anger people; they laugh at him and then beat him up. i'm sure he's out there dancing. i could have sworn he trampled on me.", "when i meet this gentleman, i'll tell him what you've said.", "oh, please do. he'll say a few nasty things about me, and if nobody listens to him or laughs, he'll be thrown into a funk. and that will save a partridge wing from being eaten, because he'll be too miserable for dinner.", "come on, we have to follow the leaders of the dance.", "in every good thing they do.", "no, if they try to lead us to harm, i will leave the dance floor at the next song.", "borachio my brother just wooed hero and now has taken her father inside to tell him his feelings. the ladies have followed hero, but one masked man remains."], ["that's claudio. i can tell by the way he carries himself.", "claudio aren't you signior benedick?", "you know me too well. i am benedick.", "sir, my brother is very fond of you. he is in love with hero. please make him change his mind. she doesn't have the proper rank to marry the prince. you would be doing a good service.", "how do you know he loves her?", "i heard him swear he did.", "i did too, and he also swore he would marry her tonight.", "come on, let's get to the banquet.", "though i said my name was benedick, i heard this news with claudio's ears. of course the prince wants hero for himself. friendship is enduring except when love is involved. therefore, all lovers should speak for themselves. they should look for themselves, without asking someone else to get involved in their affairs. beauty is a witch whose spells can turn loyalty into passion. this happens a lot, but it didn't occur to me that it would happen to me. goodbye then, hero."], ["claudio?", "yes, that's me.", "will you come with me?", "where?", "right over to that to see about your business. how do you want to wear your garland of willow leaves? around your neck, like a moneylender's gold chain, or under your arm, like a lieutenant's sash? you have to wear it somehow, because the prince has gotten your hero.", "i hope he enjoys her.", "you sound like a cattle dealer: that's the way they sell bulls. but do you really think the prince would treat you that way?", "please, leave me alone.", "look at you, thrashing about like a blind man. a boy robbed you, but you'll beat up the post instead.", "if you won't leave, then leave."], ["oh, the poor bird. now he'll hide himself in the bushes. but how strange that beatrice should seem to know who i was and yet not know at the same time. \"the prince's fool\"! maybe they call me that because i am cheerful. yes, but i am insulting myself by thinking this way. i don't have that kind of reputation! beatrice's mean, sarcastic nature makes her believe that the entire world shares her opinions; that's why she describes me this way. well, i'll get my revenge.", "now, sir, where is claudio? did you see him?", "yes, my lord, i played the part of a gossip and brought him the news. i found him here, . i told him and i think i was telling the truth that you had won the lady's heart. i offered to accompany him to the willow tree, where he could either make a garland fit to be worn by an abandoned lover or gather sticks into a bundle, ready for his beating.", "beating? why, what did he do?", "he was like a schoolboy who finds a bird's nest and happily shows it to his friend, who then steals it from him.", "what, is trusting a friend such a crime? the criminal is the one who stole the nest."], ["it might have been appropriate to make both the rod and the garland. he could have worn the garland himself and beaten you with the rod, since you as i understand it have stolen his bird's nest.", "i only want to teach the baby birds to sing; then i will return the nest to its rightful owner.", "we'll wait and see; if the chicks follow your lead if hero is ready to love claudio then we'll know you're telling the truth.", "lady beatrice is angry with you. the gentleman she danced with told her you insulted her.", "not even a block of wood could handle her abuses! an oak tree barely clinging to life would have revived itself to fight her. even my mask seemed to come to life in order to argue with her. she told me not realizing it was me that i was the prince's jester and as dull as mud. she hurled mocking insults at me with such incredible speed that all i could do was stand there, paralyzed. she speaks daggers, and every word stabs. if her breath were as terrible as her words, she would kill every living thing from here to the furthest star. i wouldn't marry her, even if she were as blessed as paradise. if she were married to the great hero hercules, she would have humiliated him with chores around the house and ordered him to chop up his famous club for firewood. please, don't mention her. she's as wicked as , just disguised in pretty clothes. i wish to god that some wise man would conjure her away, because as long as she lives on earth, our lives are filled with turmoil. it's quieter in hell, where people, sinning on purpose, are eager to be sent just to get away from her. so chaos, horror, and sorrow follow her wherever she goes."], ["look, here she comes.", "your highness, could you send me on a mission to the ends of the earth? i'll go to the antipodes for any little errand you can think of. i'll fetch you a toothpick from the , or find out prester john's shoe size, or snatch a hair from kublai khan's beard, or deliver any message you wish to relay to the pygmies anything rather than exchange three words with this awful, screeching woman. isn't there something you want from me?", "nothing but your good company.", "oh, god, sir, here comes a dish i hate. i can't stand tongue.", "beatrice lady, you have lost signior benedick's heart.", "it's true, my lord. he lent it to me once, and i paid him back with interest: a double heart for his single one. really, he won it from me once before in a dishonest game of dice. so i suppose your grace can truly say that i have lost it.", "you've humiliated him, lady: you've put him down."], ["and i hope that he won't or i'm sure to have fools for children.i've brought claudio, who you sent me to find.", "why, what's wrong, count? why are you so sad?", "i'm not sad, my lord.", "what then, sick?", "i'm neither, my lord.", "the count is neither sad nor sick nor cheerful nor well he's just civil, as seville as an orange, with the same jealous-yellow complexion.", "truly, lady, i think your description is correct, though i swear he has no reason to look like that. here, claudio, i've wooed hero for you, and she's agreed to marry you. i've told her father, and he's given his permission. tell us when you wish to get married, and may god give you joy.", "claudio, take my daughter, and, with her, take my fortunes. the prince has made the match, and may god bless it.", "speak, claudio, that's your cue.", "complete joy makes one speechless; if i were only a little happy, then i could say exactly how much. lady, you are mine and i am yours. for you, i give myself away and i'm ecstatic about the exchange."], ["say something, cousin. or, if you can't say anything, stop his mouth with a kiss and don't let him speak, either.", "truly, lady, you have a merry heart.", "yes, my lord. i thank my heart the poor fool for it keeps away from seriousness. look, my cousin is whispering to claudio that she loves him.", "why, you're absolutely right, cousin.", "thank the lord for alliances! so everyone goes off into the world except me, who stays in because i'm sunburned. i should sit in the corner and sing that song, \"heigh-ho for a husband!\"", "lady beatrice, i'll get you a husband.", "i'd rather get a husband from your father. don't you have any brothers like you? your father's sons would make excellent husbands, if only a girl could catch one for herself.", "will you take me, my lady?", "no, my lord, unless i could have another husband for the work week. you are too expensive to wear every day. but please, forgive me, your highness. i was born to speak cleverly, not seriously.", "i'd be more offended if you were silent, for being lively and cheerful suits you best. surely, you must have been born at a happy time."], ["actually, my lord, my mother cried when she was giving birth to me. but then a star danced in the sky, and that's the moment i was born. kinsmen, i'm off.", "niece, will you take care of those things i mentioned?", "oh, yes, i'm sorry, uncle. if you'll excuse me, your grace.", "i swear, she's a very good-natured lady.", "there's very little about her that's gloomy, my lord. she's only sad when she sleeps and not even then. hero told me that beatrice has often had dreams about being unhappy, and managed to wake herself from them by laughing.", "she can't stand to hear about getting a husband.", "no, not at all. she mocks all her suitors so severely that they drop the suit.", "she would make a good wife for benedick.", "oh, lord, if they were married, they'd drive themselves crazy within a week.", "count claudio, when do you plan to go to church and be married?", "tomorrow, my lord. time will move as slowly as an old man until our love receives its proper ceremony."], ["wait till monday, my dear son, which is only a week away. even that is too short a time to plan things the way i would like.", "claudio oh, don't look so frustrated at having to wait so long. i promise you, claudio, the time will go by quickly. while we're waiting for the wedding, i'm going to take on an impossible task: to make signior benedick and the lady beatrice fall in love with each other. i aim to see them matched, and with all of your help, i'm sure we can make it happen.", "my lord, i will help you, even if it means i have to stay awake for ten nights straight.", "me too, my lord.", "and you, sweet hero?", "i'll do any decent thing, my lord, to help my cousin get a good husband.", "and benedick is not the worst husband i can think of. this much i can say about him: he is well-born, has proven his bravery in battle, and has established his good character. hero, i'll show you how to influence your cousin so she falls in love with benedick. we men will trick benedick so that, despite his quick wit and his queasiness about marriage, he will fall in love with her. if we can do this, then we will steal cupid's glory. we will be the supreme love gods! come inside with me, and i will tell you my plan."], ["it's arranged. the count claudio will marry leonato's daughter.", "yes, my lord, but i can spoil it.", "any obstacle or barrier to claudio's happiness will be like medicine to me. i hate him so much it makes me sick, and whoever can ruin his happiness will make me happy. how will you wreck this marriage?", "i can only do it by lying, my lord, but i can do it so secretly that no one will suspect me.", "quickly, tell me how.", "i think it was a year ago that i told you how much margaret, hero's servant woman, likes me.", "i remember.", "i can arrange it so that at some indecent hour of the night, she looks out hero's bedroom window.", "how will that kill this marriage?", "that part is up to you. go to the prince, your brother, and tell him that he has done a terrible thing by matching the renowned claudio whom you greatly admire with such a tainted whore as hero."], ["what will be my evidence?", "evidence enough to deceive the prince, anger claudio, ruin hero, and kill leonato. is there anything else you wish?", "that's all i want, and i'll do anything to accomplish it.", "find a time to speak with don pedro and claudio alone. tell them you know that hero loves me. pretend to be very concerned about both the prince, who has compromised his honor by making the match, and claudio, whose reputation will be ruined by this woman who's pretending to be a virgin. of course, they won't believe you without proof. tell them you've seen the two of us at hero's bedroom window, and then bring them to see for themselves on the night before the wedding. i'll arrange it so that hero is away for the night, so what they'll actually see is margaret and me at the window, calling each other \"hero\" and it'll be such blatant evidence of hero's disloyalty that claudio's jealousy will quickly turn to certainty, and the wedding will be instantly called off.", "make the arrangements, and i'll do it. do this carefully, and i will reward you with a thousand gold coins.", "if you make the accusation convincingly, then my cunning won't fail me.", "i'll go now to find out the date of the wedding."], ["boy!", "yes signior?", "in my bedroom window there is a book. go get it and bring it to me here in the orchard.", "i'm already here, sir.", "i see that you are here, but i'd like you to go there and then come back again.", "i'm amazed that a man, after watching romance turn another man into a fool and laughing at that man, can turn right around and become the thing he's scorned. that's the kind of man claudio is. i knew him when he listened to nothing but the military drum and fife; now he would rather hear the sweet and refined music of the tabor and pipe. i knew him when he would've walked ten miles to see a well-crafted suit of armor; now he spends ten nights awake in his room designing himself a fancy new jacket. he used to speak plainly and to the point, like an honorable man and soldier; now his speech is elaborate and flowery. his words are like a miraculous banquet, full of strange new dishes. will i be changed like that, and see the world through a lover's eyes? i'm not sure, but i don't think so."], ["i can't promise that love won't transform me, but i can promise you this: until i truly fall in love, a woman will never make me act like such a fool. a beautiful woman comes along, but i'm unmoved. a wise woman turns up, but i'm unmoved. a virtuous woman appears, but i'm unmoved. i refuse to fall in love until all three qualities unite in a single woman. she must be rich, certainly, and smart, or i'll have nothing to do with her. she has to be virtuous, or i'll never bid on her; beautiful, or i won't bother to look at her. mild-mannered, or else she should stay away from me. noble, or i won't have her even if she's an angel. she must be well spoken, an excellent musician, and her hair should be well, i suppose the color doesn't matter. ha! look, it's the prince and mr. love. i'll hide in the arbor.", "well, should we hear some music?", "yes, my lord. listen to how quiet the evening is, as if it's purposefully setting the stage for a song.", "claudio do you see where benedick is hiding?", "don pedro yes, very well, my lord. once the music has ended, we'll give him more than he bargained for.", "come on, balthasar, let's hear that song again."], ["oh, my good lord, don't make me insult music again with my awful singing.", "you can tell an artist is excellent when he denies his own perfection. please, sing for us; don't make me woo you anymore!", "since you put it that way, i'll sing. you're like a suitor who courts a woman insincerely, swearing that he loves her even though he really doesn't find her worthy.", "come on, please sing. if you'd like to continue this discussion, at least do so with music.", "just know this before i begin: i can't play a single note that's worthy of note.", "listen to him speaking in quarter notes! get on with your note-playing now.", "that music must be divine, because their souls have been captivated. isn't it strange that strings made of sheep's guts are capable of drawing men's souls out of their bodies? well, rather listen to a plain old hunting horn than this music, when all is said and done."], [", , . , . . , .", "that's a good song.", "and a bad singer, my lord.", "ha! no, no, really, your voice is good enough in a pinch.", "if a dog had howled like that, i would have hung it. i hope his horrible singing doesn't have any ill effects. i would've rather listened to the night raven screech, even if the bird's noise does give me the plague, as they say it will.", "yes, do you hear me, balthasar? please, get some excellent music, because tomorrow we want to serenade lady hero at her bedroom window."], ["i'll do the best i can, my lord.", "please do. goodbye.", "come here, leonato. what was it that you told me today that your niece beatrice was in love with signior benedick?", "oh yes. don pedro go on, keep walking: our prey is in sight. i never thought that woman would love any man.", "i didn't, either. but how wonderful that she should be so fond of signior benedick, whom she has always appeared to hate.", "is it possible? is that the way the wind is blowing?", "really, my lord, i don't know what to make of it, but she loves him with such a passion that it's past all understanding.", "maybe she's just pretending.", "yes, that's quite likely.", "oh god! pretending? no one has ever faked passion as skillfully as this, then.", "why, what symptoms of love does she exhibit?", "leonato bait the hook well; this fish is going to bite."], ["what symptoms, my lord? she will have a seat you heard my daughter tell you how.", "yes, she did tell us.", "please, please tell me! this is amazing. i would have thought she was invincible against any assault of love.", "i would have sworn that, too, my lord, especially against benedick.", "i would take this as a joke if the old man weren't saying it. mischief surely can't be hiding in such a respectable man.", "don pedro we've infected him! keep it up.", "has she told benedick how she feels?", "no, and she swears she never will. that's what's driving her crazy.", "it's true, hero says so. beatrice asks, \"does it make any sense to write and tell him i love him when i have always treated him with scorn?\"", "she says this as she begins to write the letter. she'll be getting up twenty times in a night, sitting there in her slip until she's written a page. my daughter told me everything.", "now that you speak of paper, i remember a funny story of hero's."], ["oh, you mean when beatrice writes a letter and hero sees that it has \"benedick\" and \"beatrice\" written all over it?", "yes, that's the one.", "oh, she tears that letter into a thousand small pieces and berates herself for being so forward as to write a letter to a man she knows would mock her. \"i compare him,\" she says, \"to myself, and i know that i would mock him if he wrote me such a letter. yes, even though i love him, i would mock him.\"", "then she falls down to her knees, weeps, sobs, beats her breast, tears her hair, prays, and curses: \"oh sweet benedick! god give me patience!\"", "she did indeed, my daughter says so. she worries that beatrice is so overwrought that she might do herself harm someday. it's true.", "if she won't tell benedick, someone else should.", "and what would that accomplish? he'll just turn it into a joke and torment the poor woman even more.", "if he did that, it would be a charitable deed to hang him. she's an excellent, sweet woman, and there's no doubt that she is virtuous.", "and she is very smart.", "except for the fact that she loves benedick."], ["oh, my lord, when wisdom and passion are in one body, it's ten to one that the passion will win. i am sorry for her, as i should be, since i am both her uncle and her guardian.", "i wish she were in love with me instead. i would have thrown away all other considerations and made her my wife. please, tell benedick about her feelings and see what he has to say.", "is that a good idea, do you think?", "hero thinks beatrice will surely die, for she says she'll die if he doesn't love her, and that she'll die before she tells him, and she'll die if he woos her and she's made to hold back even one of her usual insults.", "she's probably right. if she offers him her love, it's very possible that he'll scorn it, since, as we all know, he tends to be contemptuous.", "he's a very proper man.", "indeed, he is good-looking and carries himself well.", "and i swear to god he's very smart.", "he does indeed show sparks of something like wit.", "and i believe him to be brave.", "as brave as , surely. and you could say that he is wise in managing fights, for he either avoids them discreetly or enters into them timidly."], ["if he fears god, he must necessarily keep the peace. if he breaks the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.", "and he'll do that, because he's a god-fearing man, even though his joking makes it seem otherwise. well, i'm sorry for your niece. should we go find benedick and tell him about beatrice's love?", "no, don't ever tell him, my lord. let her get over it, with the help of good advice.", "no, that's impossible. her heart will break first.", "well, we'll hear more about it from your daughter. let it sit for a while. i am very fond of benedick, and i just wish he would take a look at himself and realize how unfairly he's treating this good woman.", "my lord, will you come with me? dinner is ready.", "don pedro leonato if he doesn't fall in love with her now, i'll never trust my intuition again.", "leonato the same trap must be set for her; that's your daughter's and servants' job. the real fun will be when they both believe the other to be in love, without any of it being true. i can't wait to watch that drama it'll be a pantomime, since both of them will be totally speechless! let's send beatrice to call benedick in to dinner"], ["this can't be a trick. they spoke with great seriousness, and they have hero's testimony. they seem to pity the lady. it seems her love is stretched to the limit. she loves me? well, that love must be returned! i hear how i'm criticized. they say i'll be smug if i find out she loves me. they also say she'd rather die than give any sign of her feelings. i never thought i'd marry. i can't appear to be proud. people who discover their faults and can then change them are lucky indeed. they say the lady is beautiful; it's true, i've seen it myself. and virtuous; that's true, i can't disprove that. and smart, except that she loves me. that may not be any proof of her intelligence, but i swear it won't be evidence of her stupidity for i'm going to be horribly in love with her! people might tease me here and there, since i attacked marriage for so long. but don't tastes change? a man can love a dish when he is young that he hates when he turns old. will quips and clever remarks and scathing written words keep a man from getting what his heart desires? no! the world needs to be populated. when i said that i'd die as a bachelor, i just meant that i didn't think i'd live until i got married. here comes beatrice. by god! she's a beautiful lady. i think i sense some signs of love in her.", "against my will, i've been told to bring you in to dinner.", "lovely beatrice, i thank you for taking the pains to tell me that."], ["i didn't take any more pains bringing this message than you took pains in thanking me. if the job had been painful, i would not have come.", "so you took pleasure in bringing me this message?", "yes, as much pleasure as one might take in choking a bird at knifepoint. you don't want to eat, sir? goodbye, then.", "ha! \"against my will, i've been told to bring you in to dinner.\" there's a double meaning in that. \"i didn't take any more pains bringing this message than you took pains in thanking me.\" that's like saying, \"any thing i do for you is as easy as saying thank you.'\" if this doesn't move me to take pity on her, i'm a horrible person. if i don't love her, i'm completely . i will go get her picture."], ["margaret, run into the sitting room. you'll find beatrice there, talking to claudio and the prince. whisper to her that ursula and i are walking in the orchard and that we're talking all about her. tell her you heard us, and that she should sneak into the arbor where the crisscrossing branches overhead keep the honeysuckles out of the sun. (the same honeysuckles that were once ripened in the sun; they're like courtiers who rise because the king favors them, then plot to overthrow his majesty.) she can hide there and eavesdrop on our conversation. this is your job. do it well, and then leave us.", "i'll make her come right away, i promise you.", "all right ursula, as beatrice arrives, we'll be walking up and down this alley and speaking about nothing but benedick. whenever i mention him, praise him more than any man deserves. it'll be my job to talk about how benedick is sick with love for beatrice. we'll make our arrows the same way cupid does: with gossip and rumor."], ["let's start. see, beatrice has run over like a little bird, keeping close to the ground and trying to overhear us.", "hero the best part of fishing is watching the fish cut through the water and greedily take the bait. now we're fishing for beatrice, who's hiding right now in the honeysuckle arbor. don't worry, i'll do my part.", "ursula then let's get closer, so she can hear all the false, sweet bait we're setting for her. no, truly, ursula, she's too scornful. she's as devious and fierce as the wild hawks on the rocks.", "but are you sure that benedick loves beatrice that much?", "that's what the prince and my fianc say.", "and did they ask you to tell beatrice about this, madam?", "they did want me to tell her, but i persuaded them that, if they truly loved benedick, they would try to get him to battle his emotions and keep beatrice in the dark.", "why did you do that? doesn't benedick deserve as much luck with a mate as he would have with beatrice?"], ["by the god of love, i know that he deserves all that a man might possess. but nature never made a woman's heart as proud and tough as beatrice's. there is scorn and disdain in her eyes, and those sparkling eyes despise everything they look upon. she values her wit more highly than anything else, which looks weak by comparison. she's so in love with herself, she's incapable of loving anyone else. she can't even imagine what \"love\" is.", "yes, you're right. it would be bad if she knew about benedick's love and teased him about it.", "it's true. whenever she meets a man no matter how wise, noble, young, handsome she rearranges all his good qualities so they end up looking bad. if he has a fair complexion, she'll say the pretty man should be her sister, not her husband. if he's dark-skinned, nature must have spilled some ink while drawing his foolish face. if he's tall, she'll say he's a spear topped by an odd head; if he's short, she says he looks like a badly carved miniature. if he's talkative, he's a weathervane, moving in all directions at once; if he's silent, he's a block that can't be moved at all. and so she turns men inside out and never acknowledges the integrity and merit that a man has.", "it's true, her nitpicking is hardly admirable.", "no, it certainly is not admirable to be so perverse and eccentric. but who would dare tell her? if i said something, she'd mock me so mercilessly that i'd probably disintegrate into air. she'd laugh me right out of my body and kill me with her wit."], ["so benedick should conceal his emotions. like a fire that gets covered up, benedick should smother his love and waste away. it would be better to die that way than to die from being mocked, which is as bad as being killed by tickling.", "but you should tell her about this, and hear what she has to say.", "no, instead i'll go to benedick and advise him to fight his emotions. i'll make up some awful things about my cousin and ruin her reputation. you don't know how quickly affection can be killed with a single nasty word.", "oh, don't injure your cousin like that! with the quick, intelligent wit she's rumored to have, she can't really be such a bad judge of character that she'd refuse a man as exceptional as signior benedick.", "he's the only worthy man in italy, aside from my dear claudio.", "don't be angry with me for speaking my mind, but throughout italy, benedick is considered the best man in looks, bearing, intelligence, and bravery.", "true, he has an excellent reputation.", "and he deserves it, having been excellent before he had a reputation for it. when are you getting married, madam?"], ["tomorrow, and then every day after that. come on, let's go inside. i want to show you some clothing, so you can tell me what i should wear tomorrow.", "hero we caught her in our trap, madam, i'm sure of it.", "ursula if so, then you never know where love will come from. cupid gets some lovers with arrows, but some he lays traps for!", "i'm burning up with shame! can this be true? do people criticize me this much for being proud and scornful? then i'll say goodbye to my contempt and my pride in being unmarried! no good is spoken of such a person as me behind her back. benedick, keep on loving me and i will return your love, like a wild hawk being tamed by her handler. i'll be kind to you from now on, and if you really do love me, that kindness will encourage you to seal our love with a wedding band. people say that you deserve my love, and i believe it not just because they've said so."], ["i'll stay in messina until you're married, and then i'll go to aragon.", "i'll go with you, my lord, if you'll allow me.", "no, taking you away from your new marriage would be like showing a child a new coat and then not letting him wear it. i'll ask only benedick to come with me, for from the top of his head to the soles of his feet he's a joker. he's evaded love once or twice, and since then cupid doesn't dare to shoot at him. benedick's heart is like a bell, with his tongue as the clapper: everything his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.", "gentleman, i am not the same man i was before.", "i agree. i think you seem more serious.", "i hope he's in love.", "come off it, man! there isn't a single drop of sincerity in him that could be touched with love. if he looks serious, he must need money.", "i have a .", "", "", "you have to hang it first. then you can it."], ["what, are you moaning on about your toothache?", "it could only have been caused by some humor or .", "well, everyone knows how to overcome an injury except the one who actually has one.", "i repeat, he's in love.", "no, there's no love in him, unless you mean his love for strange costumes. he's a dutchman today, a frenchman tomorrow, and sometimes wears the clothing of two countries at once: a german from the waist down, with his baggy pants, and a spaniard from the hips up, with a cloak and no jacket. unless you're talking about his love for this kind of foolishness which, judging from his appearance, he has he is no fool for love, as you pretend.", "if he's not in love with a woman, then you can't trust the usual symptoms. he brushes his hat in the mornings. what do you think that means?", "has any man seen him at the barber's?", "no, but the barber's assistant has been seen with him. the beard that used to decorate benedick's cheeks has been shaved off and is now stuffing .", "getting rid of the beard definitely makes him look younger.", "and he's rubbed himself with perfume. can you smell out his secret now?"], ["that's as good as proof that the sweet young man's in love.", "the biggest clue is his seriousness.", "and when has he ever been known to wash his face?", "yes, or to wear cosmetics? i hear what they say about him for doing that.", "indeed, his mocking spirit has now crawled into a , and he can be played like an instrument", "truly, it all adds up to a serious story for benedick. a conclusion, a conclusion: he is in love.", "oh, and i know who loves him.", "i bet i know, too: someone who clearly doesn't know him at all.", "no, she does know him, and she also knows all his bad qualities and in spite of all this, she still dies for him.", "she'll be buried with her face upwards, then."], ["this chatter is no cure for my toothache. leonato old sir, please walk with me a bit. i have eight or nine well-considered words to say to you, and i don't want these fools to hear.", "i bet my life he's gone to speak with leonato about beatrice!", "it must be. by now, hero and margaret have done their part with beatrice. the two bears won't bite each other the next time they meet.", "my lord and brother, god save you.", "good evening, brother.", "if you don't mind, i'd like to speak with you.", "in private?", "if you wish. but count claudio can stay, for what i'm about to say concerns him.", "what's the matter?", "claudio do you plan on getting married tomorrow?", "you know that he does.", "i don't know that, once he knows what i know."], ["if there's any reason we shouldn't get married, i urge you to tell me.", "you may think that i don't love you. i hope that, after i tell you my news, you will think better of me. my brother thinks highly of you, and because of his affection, has helped arrange your marriage but that was definitely a waste of his time and energy.", "why, what's the matter?", "i came here to tell you i'll make this short, since she's already been talked about for too long the lady is unfaithful.", "who, hero?", "that's the one: leonato's hero, your hero, every man's hero.", "unfaithful?", "the word is too good to represent her wickedness. she is worse than wicked. if you can think of a more awful title, i'll call her that. but don't keep wondering without more proof. come with me tonight, and you'll see a man enter her bedroom chamber even tonight, the night before her wedding. if you still love her after that, then marry her tomorrow. but you would be more honorable if you changed your mind.", "don pedro is this possible?", "i won't consider it."], ["if you won't risk coming to see her tonight, then don't claim to know what she's like. if you follow me, i'll give you all the proof you need. once you have seen more and heard more, then you can decide what to do.", "if i see anything tonight that convinces me not to marry her, i'll shame her tomorrow in the very congregation where i would have married her.", "and since i wooed her in your name, i'll join you in disgracing her.", "i won't say anything else about her until you two see things for yourselves. remain calm until midnight, and then you'll see what the trouble is.", "oh, this day has turned into a disaster!", "oh, mischief has ruined our plans!", "oh, a plague has been prevented, thank god! that's what you'll say once you've seen part two."], ["are you all good and honest men?", "yes they are, otherwise it would be proper for them to suffer , body and soul.", "if they had any when they were chosen for the prince's watch, a punishment like that would be too good for them.", "well, give them their assignment, sir dogberry.", "first, which man do you think is most to be leader of the watch?", "either hugh otecake, sir, or else george seacole, because both of them can read and write.", "come here, sir seacole. god has blessed you with a good name. to be good-looking is a matter of luck, but to read and write is a natural gift.", "both of which, master constable", "you have. i knew that would be your answer. well, for your good looks, sir, thank god and don't boast about it. as for your reading and writing, use those skills when you can't use your looks. you're thought to be the most and fit man here, so you will carry the lantern and be constable. this is your assignment:"], ["you will any vagrant men you see. you are to order all men to stop, in the prince's name.", "and what if he won't stop?", "well then, don't bother with him and let him go. then immediately call the rest of the watch together and thank god that you've gotten rid of such a criminal.", "if he won't stop when he's told to, then he isn't one of the prince's subjects.", "true, and you aren't supposed to meddle with anyone but the prince's subjects. you will also stay quiet in the streets, for a babbling watch is most and will not be endured.", "we'll sleep instead of talk. we know what's appropriate for a watch.", "why, you speak like an experienced and quiet watchman. sleeping on the watch shouldn't be a problem; just make sure that your weapons don't get stolen. also, you're supposed to visit all the bars and tell anyone who's drunk to go home and go to bed.", "and what if they won't go?", "well then, leave them alone until they're sober. if even then they don't answer to your satisfaction, you can say that they're not the men you thought they were.", "very good, sir."], ["if you meet a thief, you can expect him to be dishonest. the less you have to do with that kind of man, the more honest you will be.", "so if we know that a man is a thief, should we try to arrest him?", "your position permits you to, but i think that those who stick their hands in get their hands dirty. if you encounter a thief, i think the most peaceable thing to do is to let him be himself and steal away.", "you have always been known as a merciful man, partner.", "truly, i wouldn't even hang a dog, much a man who has any honesty in him.", "if you hear a child crying in the night, you should call the nurse and tell her to quiet the child.", "what if the nurse is asleep and doesn't hear us?", "well then, leave quietly, and let the child's crying wake up the nurse. the ewe that doesn't go to her lamb when it will never tend to another animal's child.", "that's very true.", "and that's the end of your assignment. you, constable, are representing the prince himself. if you meet the prince in the night, you can order him to stop.", "no, by our lady, i don't think he can."], ["i'll bet any man who knows the law five shillings to one on it. truly though, you can't stop the prince without the prince's consent, for the watch shouldn't offend anyone, and it's an offense to keep a man without his consent.", "by our lady, i think that's true.", "ha, ha, ha! well, gentlemen, good night. and if anything important happens, find me and let me know. keep each other's secrets and your own. good night. come, friend.", "well gentlemen, we've heard our assignment. let's sit here on the church bench until two and then go off to bed.", "one more thing, good gentlemen. watch over signior leonato's house; with the wedding being held there tomorrow, there's a great to-do there tonight. adieu. be , i beg you.", "conrade!", "quiet! don't move!", "conrade, i say!", "i'm here, man, at your elbow."], ["come to think of it, i thought i felt a scab there.", "i'll get you for that. now get on with your story.", "since it's drizzling, stand under this overhang with me and, like a true drunk, i'll tell you everything.", "watchmen there's some treason occurring, gentlemen. stay here.", "you should know i've earned a thousand gold pieces from don john.", "is it possible that any crime could be so valuable?", "you should ask instead if it's possible that any criminal could be so rich. because when rich villains need poor villains' services, those poor ones can name the price.", "i can't believe it.", "that only proves how inexperienced you are. you know that the style of a man's jacket or hat or coat means nothing.", "yes, it's just clothing.", "no, i mean, the fashion of a man's clothing tells us nothing about the man.", "yes, fashion is fashion."], ["c'mon, i might as well say the fool's the fool! but don't you see what a villain fashion is?", "watchmen i know that man, . for the past seven years, he's been a wicked thief. he walks around as if he were a gentleman. i remember that name.", "did you hear someone?", "just the weathervane moving.", "as i was saying, fashion is a deformed villain. it makes hot-blooded young men spin around feverishly, forever changing their appearances, dictating that sometimes they dress like pharoah's soldiers in that grimy painting and sometimes like the priests of the god baal, as seen in old church windows. and sometimes fashion dresses them like the great hercules in that dirty, worm-eaten tapestry the one where his seems almost as big as his club.", "i get all this. and i also understand how fashion changes so quickly that a man's clothing never gets a chance to wear itself out. but you're all wound up about fashion, too. otherwise, why would you stray from your story to blabber on about it?", "no, i'm not wound up. but i will tell you that i seduced margaret, the lady hero's waiting woman, tonight. i called her \"hero\" the whole time. she leaned out of her mistress's bedroom window and told me good night a thousand times but i am telling this story poorly. i should backtrack and begin with how my master, don john, arranged for the prince, claudio, and himself to witness this friendly encounter from the orchard."], ["and they thought margaret was hero?", "the prince and claudio did, but the devil, my master, knew that it was margaret. they believed the charade partially because of my master's testimony which first caused them to doubt hero and partially because of how dark and deceiving the night was, but mostly because of my villainous actions, which confirmed don john's slander. claudio went away enraged, swearing that he'd meet hero at the temple as planned and there, before the entire congregation, shame her with what he'd discovered and send her home without a husband.", "we charge you, in the prince's name, to stop!", "call up the master constable dogberry. we have the most dangerous piece of lechery that was ever known in the commonwealth.", "and one of them is the criminal deformed. i know him; he wears a lock of hair.", "gentlemen, gentlemen", "borachio i bet you'll be forced to bring deformed forward.", "gentlemen, don't speak. we you to go with us."], ["we're probably a very valuable catch for these guys.", "well, our value is debatable, i bet. let's go, we'll obey you."], ["good ursula, go wake my cousin and ask her to get up.", "i will, lady.", "and request that she come here.", "very well.", "really, i think your other ruff is better.", "no, please good meg, i'll wear this one.", "honestly, it's not as good as the other one, and i'm sure your cousin will agree with me.", "my cousin's a fool, and you are too. i'll wear this one and none other.", "i like your new wig and headdress, though i'd like it more if the hair were a shade browner. and your gown is really stylish. you know, i saw the duchess of milan's gown, the one that everyone praises so highly.", "oh, they say that dress surpasses all others."], ["compared to your dress, it's no better than a nightgown. the cloth is interwoven with gold thread, and slashes in the material show the fabric beneath. it is trimmed with silver lace and embroidered with pearls. it has one set of fitted sleeves and another ornamental pair that hangs open from the shoulders. the skirts are trimmed with a blue, metallic fabric. but for a fine, elegant, graceful, and excellent dress, yours is worth ten of those.", "i hope i enjoy wearing it, for my heart is very heavy.", "it will be made even heavier soon by the weight of a man.", "watch your tongue! have you no shame?", "shame of what, lady? sex and marriage are honorable things even for a beggar, right? and isn't your husband an honorable man? you're so prudish you'd probably like me to say, \"i beg your pardon, your \" as if husband were a dirty word! so long as suspicious minds aren't misinterpreting my honest words, i'll offend no one. what's wrong with admitting your husband's going to lie on you? nothing, as long as it's the right husband with the right wife. that's right and proper anything else is frivolous and immoral. ask beatrice. here she comes.", "good morning, cousin.", "good morning, sweet hero."], ["why do you sound so odd? are you ill? you sound out of tune.", "i must be ill i don't think i can speak in any other tune.", "if it's a tune we want, let's sing \"light on love!\" it's a light song and doesn't require a man to sing the baritone. you sing, and i'll dance.", "you're \"light on love\" sure enough your frivolous dancing proves you have light heels! when you're married one of these days, if your husband is rolling in dough, you'll let him roll in the hay whenever he wants.", "never! i reject that life; i kick it away with my .", "hero it's almost five o'clock, cousin. you should be ready by now. oh, i really don't feel well. heigh-ho!", "are you sighing for a hawk, a horse, or a husband?", "i have an ache; i'm sighing for the letter that begins all those words.", "well, if you haven't your old faith yet, we can't trust anything anymore.", "what does the fool mean by that, i wonder?", "i don't mean anything but god sends everyone their heart's desire.", "the count sent me an excellent pair of perfumed gloves."], ["sorry, i'm all stuffed. i can't smell a thing.", "oh, just a young lady and already that's a nice way to catch a cold.", "oh, god help me! since when have you claimed to be such a great wit?", "ever since you lost yours. doesn't my wit suit me well?", "it doesn't get seen enough; you should wear it in your cap, the way fools wear coxcombs. god, i'm really sick.", "you should get some distilled and put it on your chest. it's the only way to cure a sudden faintness.", "with that you've managed to prick her with a thistle.", "! why do you suggest i use ? is there some double meaning in that word, \"benedictus\"?", "double meaning! no, honestly, there's no other meaning. i just meant that you should use some holy thistle. maybe you think that i think you're in love. no, by our lady, i'm not such a fool to think what i please, and i don't please to think what i can, and in fact i cannot think, even if i could think my heart right past thinking, that you are in love or that you will be in love or even that you can be in love. but benedick was once an enemy of love as well, and now he's become a real man. he swore that he'd never get married, but now, despite his earlier protestations, he loves ungrudgingly. how we're going to convert you i'll never know. and yet i think you look with your eyes just like every other woman does."], ["why are you talking at such a crazy clip?", "it's not a false gallop, anyway.", "madam, we have to go: the prince, the count, signior benedick, don john, and all the gentlemen of the town have come to bring you to church.", "good cousin, good meg, good ursula, come help me get dressed."], ["what do you want from me, my good man?", "please, sir, i would like to discuss some news that you greatly.", "be brief, please, because, as you can see, this is a busy time for me.", "indeed, sir, it is.", "yes, it truly is.", "what's the news, my good friends?", "sorry, sir, goodman verges tends to ramble. he's an old man, sir, and his wits are not as as i wish they were. but truly, he's as honest as the skin between his brows.", "yes, i thank god that i am as honest as all the other old men who are not honester than me.", "making comparisons is , verges. get on with your story.", "friends, you are becoming tedious.", "thank you for saying that, your worship, but we're just the poor duke's officers. but truly, if i were as as a king, i would give everything to you, your worship."], ["oh, so you'd give me all your tediousness?", "yes, even if i had a thousand more pounds than that, for i hear that you are throughout the city, and though i am only a poor man, it makes me glad to hear it.", "me, too.", "gentlemen, please, i'd like to hear your news.", "sir, our watch tonight , sir has captured a couple of the worst criminals in messina.", "leonato verges is a good old man, sir, but he's always babbling. like they say, \"when age comes, wit goes.\" god help us, what a world! verges you did well, verges, honestly. leonato well, god's a fair man. if two men are riding on one horse, one must naturally ride behind. verges is as honest a man as any, but, god bless him, not all men are created equal. am i right, my friend?", "truly, my friend, he isn't nearly as impressive as you are.", "god gives those gifts i had nothing to do with it.", "now i must return to the wedding.", "one more thing, sir. our watch, sir, as you know, has two auspicious persons. we'd like for you to examine them this morning."], ["examine them yourselves, then bring me your findings. now i'm in a great hurry, as i'm sure you can see.", "that will be .", "have some wine before you go. goodbye.", "my lord, they're waiting for you to give your daughter away to claudio.", "i'm coming.", "go to francis seacole, the constable of the watch. tell him to bring his pen and his inkwell to the jail. we will now go to these men.", "we must do this wisely.", "we won't hold back any of our wisdom. we'll drive them to a . go get the educated writer to record our excommunication, and i'll meet you at the jail."], ["all right, friar francis, let's keep this short. do a simple ceremony, and list all the particular duties of marriage later.", "claudio have you come here, my lord, to marry this lady?", "no.", "no, he comes to be married her. friar, you are the one who has come to marry her.", "lady, do you come here to be married to this count?", "i do.", "if either of you knows any secret reason why you two should not be joined in marriage, i order you on your souls to say so.", "do you know any, hero?", "none, my lord.", "do you know any, count?"], ["i'm sure i can answer for him he doesn't know any, either.", "oh, the things men dare to do! the things men are allowed to do! the things men do daily, not knowing what they're doing!", "what, are we playing with interjections? well then, add some interjections that indicate laughter, like", "hold on, friar. leonato father, are you giving me your daughter freely?", "as freely, son, as god gave her to me.", "and what should i give you that would be equal in value to this rare and precious gift?", "nothing, sir, except grandchildren.", "good prince, you have taught me how to accept things nobly. there, leonato, take your daughter back. don't insult a friend by giving him a beautiful orange that rots inside. she only appears honorable from the outside. look, how she blushes like a virgin! oh, sin can disguise itself so artfully! doesn't that rising blush suggest that she is virtuous and innocent? all of you who are looking at her, wouldn't you swear that she's a virgin, judging by these outward shows? but she is no virgin. she has been in a man's bed. she blushes from guilt, not modesty."], ["what do you mean, my lord?", "i won't be married. i won't join my soul to such a proven slut.", "my dear lord, if it was you who conquered her and took her virginity", "i know what you're about to say. if i had slept with her, you'd say that we did so as husband and wife, merely anticipating our eventual marriage. no, leonato. i never seduced her, or tempted her with indecent words. i treated her like a brother would treat a sister, with modest sincerity and appropriate affection.", "and have i ever seemed less than modest or appropriate to you?", "curse you for your false appearances! to me, you seemed like in her orbit as virginal as the flower bud before it blooms. but you're actually as hot-blooded as venus, or a pampered animal allowed to run wild.", "are you sick, my lord? is that why you're talking so wildly?", "good prince, say something!", "what should i say? i've been dishonored: i arranged for a friend of mine to marry a common whore.", "are you really saying these things, or am i dreaming?"], ["they're really being spoken, sir, and they're true.", "this doesn't look like a wedding.", "it's true! oh god!", "leonato, am i standing here? is this the prince? is this the prince's brother? is this face hero's? are these our eyes?", "yes, that's all true but what do you mean by it, my lord?", "let me just ask her one question, and by your authority as her father, order her to answer truthfully.", "as my child, i order you to do so.", "oh, god help me! how i'm being attacked! what kind of game is this?", "we just want you to answer to your real name.", "isn't my name hero? who can stain that name with a just accusation?", "indeed, hero herself can! you've stained your virtue with your own actions. what man were you talking to at your window last night, between the hours of midnight and one? if you're a virgin, you'll answer this question.", "i wasn't talking to any man at that time, my lord."], ["well then, you are no virgin. leonato, i'm sorry you have to hear this. i swear on my honor that we saw and heard hero talking to a brute at her window last night. and that man confessed at length how he has secretly come to her bedroom thousands of times.", "no, my lord, don't name her sinful acts or speak of them! there's no way to describe them without offending everyone here. pretty lady, i'm much ashamed of your shocking behavior.", "oh hero, you could have equaled the if only half your outward beauty matched your inner thoughts and desires! goodbye, beautiful sinner. goodbye to your pure wickedness and your wicked purity. because of you, i'll keep myself away from love. i'll hang suspicion on my eyelids, so that all the beautiful things i see are transformed into dangers and are never able to trick me again.", "does anyone have a dagger for me?", "what's wrong, cousin? why have you collapsed?", "come, let's go. these revelations have overwhelmed her."], ["how is she?", "she's dead, i think. help, uncle! hero, why hero! uncle! signior benedick! friar!", "oh fate, don't spare hero from being punished! death is the best way to cover over her shame.", "how are you, hero?", "hero take comfort, lady.", "hero are you looking up?", "yes, why shouldn't she?", "why not! isn't every living thing condemning her? can she deny the accusations that are proven by her guilty blush? die, hero, don't open your eyes. if i didn't think you were about to die soon if i thought your spirit could bear this shame i would risk punishment and kill you myself. am i sorry that i only had one child? do i blame nature for being so thrifty? oh, one child is one too many! why did i ever have one? why did you once seem lovely to me? why didn't i just adopt a beggar's child left at my doorstep, whose shame and dishonor i could have denied, not being its true father? but you were mine, and i loved and praised you for being mine, and was proud of you for being mine i loved you so much that i hardly cared about myself."], ["oh, but now you have fallen into a pit of ink, and there's not enough water in the whole wide sea to wash you clean again, and not enough salt to cover your stink.", "sir, sir, calm down. i'm so amazed by this, i don't know what to say.", "oh, on my soul, my cousin has been slandered falsely!", "lady, did you sleep in her room last night?", "no, i didn't, but i did every night for the past year.", "then it's confirmed! that's even more proof, and the case against her was airtight already. would the two princes and claudio lie? claudio, who loved her so much that talking about her wickedness made him weep?", "listen to me a moment. i've only remained silent this whole time because i've been watching hero. i've seen her begin to blush a thousand times, only to watch those blushes disappear a thousand times and an innocent paleness take over her face. and in her eyes i see a fire that would seem to burn away the lies the princes have told about her chastity. call me a fool, don't trust my observations the truth of which is backed up by all my years of experience don't trust my age, my reputation, my position, and my holiness."], ["you can doubt all these things if this sweet lady turns out to be guilty.", "but she must be, friar. you see that any morals she has left are preventing her from denying the charges: she doesn't want to add perjury to her list of sins.", "lady, who do they accuse you of having taken as your lover?", "you should ask them. i don't know who they're talking about. if i've been with a man in any improper way, let all my sins be punished! oh, father, if you yourself can prove that i talked with a man at an indecent hour, or indeed that i spoke to any creature last night, you can disown me, hate me, and torture me to death!", "the princes are under some strange misunderstanding.", "two of them are completely honorable, and if they have been tricked in this, we must blame john the bastard, who lives to create conflict."], ["i don't know. if they have spoken the truth about hero, i will tear her apart with my bare hands. but if they have accused her falsely, even the greatest of them will have to deal with me. age hasn't dried up my body or eroded my intelligence so much, and luck hasn't robbed me of so much of my fortune, and my bad ways haven't deprived me of so many friends, that they won't find me ready to seek revenge both physically and mentally, with money and friends at my disposal.", "hold on a moment, and listen to my advice. the princes left your daughter here for dead. hide her for a while in your house, and tell everyone that she has, in fact, died. make a bug show of mourning for her, hang sad epitaphs up at your family's tomb, and perform all the appropriate burial ceremonies.", "why should we do this? what will this do?", "listen, if we do this correctly, the men who slandered hero will feel remorse for her instead. that will be a good thing. but i have an even greater goal in mind. we'll maintain that she died the instant she was accused, and everyone who hears this will grieve for her, pity her, and excuse her actions. that's how it goes: we don't value the things we have until we lose them, when we suddenly rack up their value and see all the virtues we were blind to when they were alive and with us. that's how claudio will respond. when he hears that she died from his words, his imagination will be sweetly overtaken by thoughts of her. in death, every aspect of her life will be got up more beautifully, and in his mind she will seem more moving, more delicate, and more lively even than when she was alive. then, if he ever truly felt love, he'll mourn and wish he hadn't accused her even though he believed his accu-"], ["sation to be true. follow my plan, and trust that the actual events will play out even better than i am describing. and even if they don't, at least hero's supposed death will stop the rumors of her infidelity. and if it doesn't go well, then you can keep her hidden in a nunnery, the best place for someone with her kind of dirtied reputation away from the public's eyes, tongues, mind, and insults.", "signior leonato, listen to the friar's plan. and even though you know i'm very close to the prince and claudio, i swear i'll keep your counsel and deal with this secretly and justly.", "because i'm drowning in my grief, i'll grab onto the smallest piece of string dangled in front of me."], ["this is a good agreement. now, let's go. a strange disease requires a strange cure. come, lady; you must die in order to live. hopefully, your wedding day is only postponed. have patience and endure.", "lady beatrice, have you been crying this entire time?", "yes, and i'll keep crying a while longer.", "i don't wish that on you.", "you don't have to; i do it of my own free will.", "i really believe your cousin was falsely accused.", "oh, the man who avenged her could ask anything of me!", "is there any way i could show such friendship to you?", "a very clear way, but there is no friend who will undertake it.", "can a man do it?", "it's a job meant for a man, but not you.", "there is nothing in the world that i love as much as you. isn't that strange?", "it's as strange as this other thing which i don't understand. i could just as easily say that there is nothing in the world that i love as much as you. but don't believe me though i'm not lying. i confess nothing, and i deny nothing. i feel awful for my cousin."], ["by my sword, beatrice, you love me.", "don't swear like that and then go back and later.", "i'll swear by my that you love me, too, and i'll make any man who says that i don't love you eat it.", "but you won't eat your words?", "not with any sauce they could provide for them. i swear, i love you.", "well then, god forgive me!", "why, what have you done, sweet beatrice?", "you got to me first. i was about to swear that i loved you.", "then do so, with all your heart.", "i love you with so much of my heart that none of it is left to protest with.", "come, ask me to do anything for you.", "kill claudio.", "ha! i wouldn't do that for the whole wide world.", "then, rejecting my request, you kill instead. goodbye."], ["wait, sweet beatrice.", "my body waits here, but the rest of me is gone. you don't really love me. i beg you to let me go.", "beatrice", "i swear, i'm going.", "not until we part as friends.", "how dare you try to be my friend when you refuse to fight my enemy.", "is claudio your enemy?", "hasn't he proven himself to be a great villain slandering, scorning, and dishonoring my cousin? oh, i wish i were a man! he pretended that everything was fine until the moment they were exchanging vows, and then with public accusation, blatant slander, pure hatred oh god, if only i were a man! i would rip his heart out in public and eat it.", "listen to me, beatrice", "talking with a man outside her bedroom window! a likely story!", "no, but beatrice", "sweet hero, she's been wronged, she's been slandered, she's been ruined.", "beat"], ["princes and counts! oh, of course, it was all so proper and ceremonious they gave a truly princely testimony. he's a proper count, that count sugarplum, a sweet gentleman, for sure! oh, if only i were a man! or had a friend who would be a man for me! but there are no real men left. their manliness has melted into pretty curtsies and fancy manners, and their bravery is spent on making clever compliments. all this conversing has turned men into tongues and fancy ones, at that. the man who tells a lie and swears by it is now considered as brave as hercules. i can't make myself a man by wishing i were, so as a woman i'll die, from grieving.", "wait, good beatrice. i swear by this hand that i love you.", "don't just swear by it; put your hand to some use that will prove you love me.", "do you honestly think, in your soul, that claudio has wrongly accused", "yes, as sure as i have a thought or a soul.", "that's enough for me, then. i'll challenge him. i'll kiss your hand, and with that i leave you. i swear that claudio will pay dearly for this. keep me in your thoughts and go comfort your cousin. i'll go tell them that she's dead. goodbye."], ["is our whole here?", "oh, we need a stool and a cushion for the sexton.", "which ones are the malefactors?", "sir, that would be me and my partner.", "yes, yes, we've been to examine this case.", "no, you've misunderstood me where are the criminals whom i'm supposed to examine? have them come in front of the master constable.", "yes, indeed, bring them before me.", "what's your name, friend?", "borachio.", "please, write down \"borachio.\" and yours?", "i'm a gentleman, sir, and my name is conrade."], ["write down \"master gentleman conrade.\" gentlemen, are you good christians, and do you serve god?", "yes, sir, we hope so.", "write down that they hope they serve god. oh, and write \"god\" first for god forbid we put these criminals before god! gentlemen, it's already been proven that you aren't much better than lying criminals, and soon we'll know almost for certain. how do you both plead?", "honestly, sir, we say that we are not criminals.", "he's a marvelously witty fellow, no doubt, but i'll outmaneuver him. come over here; i'll whisper a word in your ear. sir, i tell you we believe you're both lying criminals.", "sir, i tell you that we are not.", "well, okay. i swear to god, both their stories match. have you written that down, that they aren't criminals?", "master constable, you're going about this all wrong. first, you have to speak to the watchmen who accused them.", "yes, good idea; that's the way. bring the watchmen forward. gentlemen, i order you in the prince's name to accuse these men."], ["this man said, sir, that don john, the prince's brother, was a villain.", "write down that prince john is a villain. why, that's flat-out to call a prince's brother a villain.", "master constable", "be quiet, you. i swear, i don't like the look of you.", "what else did you hear him say?", "that don john had given him a thousand pieces of gold for wrongfully accusing the lady hero.", "that's burglary, that is.", "yes, by god, that it is.", "what else did you hear?", "i heard that count claudio meant to disgrace hero in front of the whole wedding party and refuse to marry her.", "borachio oh, you villain! you'll be condemned to everlasting for this!", "what else?", "that's all."], ["conrade borachio you can't deny this, gentlemen. this morning, prince john secretly snuck out of messina. hero was accused exactly as the watchman described, and died on the spot from the grief. master constable, tie up these men and bring them to leonato's. i'll get there first and tell him what we found out.", "come on, let's get them .", "let them be in the hands", "get off me, you fool!", "honest to god, where's the sexton? he should write down that the prince's officer was called a fool. come on, tie them up. conrade you're a nasty little stinker!", "get away from me, you ass! you ass!", "how can you call me that? don't you suspect my office? don't you my age? oh, if only the sexton were here to write down that i'm an ass! gentlemen, remember that i am an ass; even though it's not written down, don't forget that i'm an ass. oh, you're a rotten bastard, you are. i'm a wise man and, what's more, i'm an officer of the law and, what's more, i'm a householder and, what's more, i'm as handsome a hunk of meat as any in messina. and i know the law, damn you, and i'm rich enough, damn you, and i used to have more, but i still have two robes and lots of lovely things. take him away! oh, if only the sexton had recorded that i'm an ass!"], ["if you keep on the way you've been going, you'll kill yourself. there's no point in adding to your grief.", "stop advising me; your words pass through my ears like water through a sieve. don't counsel me. only someone who's been wronged as i have can comfort me. find a father who loved his child as overwhelmingly as i loved hero and ask to be patient. compare the length and width of that man's sadness against my own; match up all the complaints and strong emotions that run through our bodies. if a man who has suffered as i have gave me advice the way you do smiling and stroking his beard, telling me to toss away my sorrow, giving speeches when he should be wailing with me, trying to heal my grief with little proverbs, spinning my head around with philosophy then i would take his advice and be patient. but that man doesn't exist. you can try to comfort a man who feels a pain that you have never felt, but once you feel it too, your sober advice will also turn into passion. you can't treat madness with rules or bind up insanity with little silken threads or cure heartache with hot air or lighten agony with pat phrases."], ["every man thinks it's his duty to advise those who are overwrought with sorrow to be patient. but no man is so moral or so strong that they can endure the same advice when they themselves are grieving. so don't advise me. my sorrow is crying too loudly to hear what you have to say.", "well then you're no better than a child.", "please, leave me alone. i intend to be flesh and blood, not airy philosophy, for there has never yet been a philosopher who could endure a toothache patiently, even though they all write as if they had risen above human suffering and misfortune.", "but don't take all that pain on yourself. make sure the ones who have wronged you suffer too.", "now you're talking. i definitely will. in my soul, i believe hero has been falsely accused. and i'll make sure that claudio, the prince, and anyone else who helped dishonor her know about it.", "the prince and claudio are hurrying this way.", "good evening, good evening.", "good day to both of you.", "listen, my lords", "we're in a bit of a hurry, leonato."], ["a bit of a hurry, my lord! well then, good bye, my lord. you're in a hurry, are you? well then, don't bother.", "come on, don't quarrel with us, good old man.", "if it's fighting he is after, some of us here should run and hide.", "who has wronged him?", "indeed, you have wronged me, you liar. don't bother trying to intimidate me by putting your hand on your sword. i'm not scared of you.", "curse my hand if it ever threatened an old man like you. really, i had no intention of going for my sword.", "damn you, don't mock and sneer at me. i'm not a doddering old fool who brags about the things he did when he was young, and what he would do now if he weren't so old. claudio, i'm telling you right to your face that you have wronged me and my innocent child. i am forced to lay aside my old man's respectability, and with my gray hairs and my aching body i challenge you to a duel. you have ruined my innocent child. your slander has broken her heart, and now she lies buried with her ancestors in a tomb ancestors who had never been tainted by scandal until you caused one with your wickedness.", "my wickedness?"], ["yours, claudio, yours, i say.", "you've got it wrong, old man.", "my lord, if he dares to accept my challenge, i'll beat him and prove he's guilty. i'll beat him despite his fancy fencing techniques and all the practicing he does, despite his youth and manliness.", "not a chance! i'll have nothing to do with you.", "you think you can get rid of me that easily? you killed my child. take on someone your own size: if you kill me, boy, you'll have killed a man.", "he'll have to kill both of us, and indeed we're both men. but let him start off easy by killing one of us. come on kill me and brag about it! let me at him. come on, come after me, little boy. come on and get me. little man, i'll be right in your face with my sword. i will, as surely as i am a gentleman.", "brother", "quiet. god knows i loved my niece, and now she's dead slandered to death by cowards who would just as likely fight a real man as i would grab a poisonous snake by the tongue. boys, fools, braggers, scoundrels, babies!", "brother anthony"], ["hold your peace. i know their kind, i know them exactly. they're petulant, disrespectful, fashion-crazy boys who lie and cheat and mock, defame and slander. they walk around in outlandish outfits, pretending to be brave and wild and saying a few inflammatory things about how they'll hurt their enemies and that's all they do.", "but brother anthony", "don't, it's no big deal. don't bother with it. let me deal with this.", "gentlemen, we won't stay here and anger you further. i'm sorry about your daughter's death, but i swear our accusations were true, and backed up with proof.", "my lord, my lord", "i don't want to hear any more about it.", "no? come on, brother! i'm determined to be heard by someone.", "and you will be, or some people here will suffer for it.", "look, here comes just the man we were looking for.", "what's up, mister?"], ["don pedro hello, my lord.", "welcome, sir. you just missed a fight that was barely avoided.", "we were about to have our noses snapped off by two old men with no teeth.", "leonato and his brother. what do you think? i think if we had fought, we would have proven too young and strong for them after all.", "there's no bravery in an unfair fight. i've been look- ing for you two.", "we've been looking for you, too. we're really depressed. will you tell us some jokes to beat our sad- ness away?", "my wit's in my . should i unsheath it?", "you wear your wit next to you?", "no one carries their wit next to them, though some people are . come on, draw your wit, just as musicians draw their bows across the instru- ments: draw for our pleasure.", "look: benedick is so pale are you sick, or angry?", "benedick buck up, man! may have killed the cat, but you are strong enough to kill care. lighten up."], ["sir, don't even try to beat me in a battle of wits. i'll meet all your attacks, even if you come charging at me with a lance at full gallop. choose another tack.", "don pedro that was poor, benedick! give him another lance that last one got broken in half.", "lord, he seems to be getting paler by the minute. i think he really is angry.", "if he is, that's his problem.", "can i have a word with you privately?", "god forbid he wants to challenge me!", "claudio you are a vil- lain. i'm not kidding. i challenge you however you like with whatever weapons you choose, and whe- never you want. meet this challenge, or i'll say that you're a coward. you've killed an innocent woman, and you're going to pay dearly for her death. what do you say?", "i'll be there, and i'll enjoy myself.", "what, are we having a feast?", "yes, we are. he has invited me to have a . he says if i don't carve them up and serve them elegantly, he'll declare i have no skills with a knife. should i go get us a woodcock, too?", "sir, you have a very slow, rambling wit."], ["benedick, beatrice praised your wit the other day. i said you had a fine wit. \"true,\" she said, \"a fine little one.\" \"no,\" i said, \"a huge wit.\" \"right,\" she said, \"a hugely awful one.\" \"no,\" i said, \"he has a good wit.\" \"exactly,\" she said, \"it's good and mild; it doesn't hurt anyone.\" \"no,\" i said, \"benedick is wise.\" \"he is certainly,\" she said, \"no,\" i said, \"he can speak many languages:\" \"i can believe that,\" she said, \"because he swore one thing to me on monday night and took it back on tuesday morning. he spoke two languages then.\" she turned all your virtues into vices just about an hour ago. but in the end she sighed and admitted you were the handsomest man in italy.", "she cried a lot at that, and said she didn't care.", "that she did. and yet for all that, if she didn't hate him to death, she'd love him to death. leonato's daughter had told us everything.", "absolutely everything. and, moreover, god saw benedick when he was hid in the garden.", "but when exactly will we see benedick married?", "yes, with the sign underneath him that says: \"here lives benedick the married man\"?", "goodbye, boy. you know what i intend. i'll leave you now to chatter and gossip like an old woman. the wit you flaunt is like a blunt sword it can't hurt anyone, thank god. my lord, i thank you for your many kindnesses. i'm leaving your court now."], ["your brother don john the bastard has run away from messina. the three of you have killed a sweet, innocent woman. lord babyface over there will meet me in a duel, and good luck to him then.", "he's serious.", "very serious, and i'm sure it's because of beatrice.", "and he challenged you to a duel?", "he did, very sincerely.", "what a strange sight a man who has put on all his fancy clothes but forgotten his brain at home!", "a guy like that is bigger than an ape, but the ape could be his doctor, it's so much smarter.", "but wait a minute. let me gather my wits and get serious here. didn't he say my brother has run away?", "come on, you. if they let you off, then we'll have to assume that lady justice has lost all her power. since you are a lying hypocrite, we must look after you.", "what's this? two of my brother's men, all tied up! and borachio is one of them!"], ["find out what they're being held for.", "officers, what crime have these men committed?", "well sir, they've lied; moreover, they have said things that were not true; secondarily, they are slanderers; sixth and lastly, they have falsely accused a lady; thirdly, they have confirmed things that did not in fact happen; and, in conclusion, they are lying scoundrels.", "first, i ask you what they've done; thirdly, i ask you what offense they're charged with; sixth and lastly, i ask you why they've been committed here; and, in conclusion, i ask what they're accused of.", "nicely done, and organized in just the way he'll understand. my god, he manages to say the same thing six different ways.", "borachio conrade what have you done, gentlemen? this educated constable is too brilliant for me to understand. what is your crime?", "prince, i won't wait for my trial: listen to my story, and let the count kill me now. i tricked your own eyes. these stupid fools have uncovered what you in all your wisdom could not. they heard me confess to conrade how don john, your brother, prompted me to slander hero how you came to the orchard and saw me making sexual advances toward margaret, who was disguised as hero; how you disgraced hero when you should have married her. they've recorded my crimes, and i would rather die than have to retell this shameful story. the lady has died because of the false accusations of me and my master. i desire nothing now but a criminal's punishment."], ["claudio doesn't this make your blood run cold?", "his words are like poison to me.", "borachio but did my brother prompt you to do all this?", "yes, and paid me well for doing it.", "he is made of treachery, and has run away to avoid his crimes.", "sweet hero; when i imagine you now, you seem as beautiful as you did when i first loved you.", "come, take away the . by now the sexton will have reformed signior leonato of the matter. claudio don pedro and, gentlemen, please do not forget to specify, whenever it is convenient, that i am an ass.", "here comes master signior leonato with the sexton.", "which one of them did it? let me see what he looks like, so when i see another man who resembles him, i'll know to avoid him. which one is it?", "if you want to see your deceiver, then look at me.", "are you the slave who, with your slanderous words, killed my innocent child?"], ["yes, i am the one.", "no, villain, but you didn't work alone. claudio don pedro for here are two noblemen the third has run away who helped you. claudio don pedro thank you, gentlemen, for my daughter's death. make a note of it on your long lists of righteous and worthy deeds. it was very brave of you.", "i don't know how to ask you for forgiveness, but i have to say something. choose your revenge. punish me through any means you can devise, though i sinned by mistake.", "me too but to satisfy this good old man, i too will bear any punishment he gives me.", "i can't ask you to make my daughter live that's impossible but i beg you both to tell the people of messina that she was innocent when she died. and if your love can produce something from its sadness, write a poem for her; hang it on her grave and sing it to her bones. sing it tonight. then come to my house tomorrow morning, and since you couldn't be my son-in-law, be my nephew instead. my brother has a daughter who looks exactly like hero; this girl is heir to both our estates. marry her as you should have married her cousin, and i will let my revenge die."], ["oh, noble sir! your overwhelming kindness makes me weep. i willingly accept your offer and put my future in your hands.", "i will see you tomorrow, then. now i have to leave. this wicked man will be brought face to face with margaret, who i believe was hired by don john to take part in this plot.", "no, she wasn't, and she didn't know anything about it. she has always been honest and good.", "leonato also, sir, this hasn't been put down in writing, but i should let you know that this here, the criminal, did in fact call me an ass. please remember that when you're punishing him. plus, the watchmen heard the criminals talking about some man named . they say that he has an earring made out of a key, with a lock hanging from it. apparently, he borrows money from people in the name of god and then never pays it back, which angers everyone so much that they now refuse to fund anything in the name of god. make sure you ask him about this.", "thank you for all your efforts.", "you speak like a very thankful and respectful boy, and may god bless you.", "dogberry this is for your trouble."], ["god save the charitable organization!", "go, you're relieved of your duty. thank you.", "i leave a slimy bastard with you, your worship, for you to punish and make an example of. god bless your worship! i wish you well. i hope that god restores you to health. i will humbly let you go now, god we will meet again in the future. come on, man.", "i'll see you tomorrow morning, gentlemen.", "goodbye, gentlemen. we'll see you tomorrow.", "we'll be there.", "i will mourn hero tonight.", "bring these criminals with us. we'll go talk to margaret, to see how she got involved with this worthless man."], ["please margaret, help me write this poem for beatrice.", "afterward, will you write a sonnet for me, praising my beauty?", "i'll write you such a glorious sonnet, margaret, that no man will ever be able to come over it. you certainly deserve it.", "no man will come ! what a life that would be!", "your wit is as quick as a greyhound's jaws it catches whatever it goes after.", "and your wit is as blunt as a practice sword, with its dull tip; it hits people but doesn't hurt them.", "it's just that my wit is very gentlemanly, margaret, and refuses to hurt a woman. now please, tell beatrice to come out. i admit defeat; i give you the .", "no, you should give a woman your sword we have our own !", "watch out, though, margaret virgins shouldn't be brandishing their bucklers around.", "i'll go get beatrice for you, who can walk here by herself she has legs."], ["so that means she'll come.", "i'm really a pitiful singer. but as a lover, well, that's another story. take , or an entire book's worth of those legendary loverboys, whose names sound so smooth and nice in a line of verse not one of them has been driven as crazy by love as i have been. but i can't prove it in a poem. i have tried. i can't think of any rhyme for \"lady\" but \"baby,\" which is a childish rhyme. the only rhyme for \"scorn\" i can come up with is a bit off for a love poem. nothing rhymes with \"school\" but \"fool,\" and that's a ridiculous jingle. these are all very unpromising line endings. no, i wasn't destined to be a poet, and i can't woo a lady with pretty words.", "beatrice, have you come because i called for you?", "yes, sir, and i'll leave when you ask me to.", "oh, well, stay till then!", "there you said \"then.\" so i'll leave now. but before i go, let me get what i came for. what happened between you and claudio?", "i spoke angry, foul words to him, and with that i will kiss you."], ["if you had foul words in your mouth, then your breath must be foul, and foul breath is nauseating. thus, i'll leave without being kissed.", "your wit is so forceful, it frightens the very meaning out of your words. but i will tell you this very plainly: i have challenged claudio, and either he'll accept the challenge or admit he's a coward. now, tell me which of my bad qualities did you fall in love with first?", "with all of them at once: they work together to create such an entirely evil person that no good ever manages to enter the mix. but tell me which of my good qualities first made you suffer love for me?", "suffer love! that's a good way of putting it. i do suffer love, because i love you against my will.", "you love me in spite of your heart, i think. if you spite your heart for my sake, then i will spite it for yours. i will never love the thing my friend hates.", "you and i are too wise to woo each other peacefully.", "it's said that no truly wise man will praise himself. if you say that you are wise, it's likely you're not.", "that's an old proverb, beatrice, from the time when neighbors praised each other. in this day and age, if a man doesn't erect his own monument before he dies, he won't be remembered past the funeral bell's ringing and his widow's crying.", "exactly how long is that, do you think?"], ["about an hour for the ringing and fifteen minutes for the crying. that's why it's better for wise men to trumpet their own virtues, like i do. that's why i praise myself, who if i do say so myself is quite praiseworthy. but tell me, how is your cousin?", "she's very sick.", "and how are you?", "i'm very sick, too.", "have faith, love me, and you will get better. and that's where i'll end, because someone is hurrying this way.", "madam, you have to go to your uncle's. there's a huge racket going on there. it's been proven that lady hero is innocent, that the prince and claudio have been utterly deceived, and that don john who has run away is the source of all the trouble. will you come immediately?", "will you come with me to hear this news, sir?", "i will live in your heart, die in your lap, and be buried in your eyes and, what's more, i will go with you to your uncle's."], ["is this the family tomb of leonato?", "it is, my lord.", "here lies hero, the heroic maiden killed by slanderous words. to repay her for her troubles, death gives her undying fame. so the life that died with shame lives on with fame.", "this epitaph will hang here forever, continuing to praise hero after i die. now start the music, and sing the solemn hymn. , . , . . ."], ["now i say good night to your bones, hero. i will perform this ceremony every year.", "good morning, gentlemen. put out your torches. the wolves have finished preying for the night, and look the gentle dawn is rising, dappling the sleepy eastern sky with spots of light.", "good morning, gentlemen. we go our separate ways.", "come, let's go and change our clothes. then we'll visit leonato's.", "and i hope will give us better luck than hero got."], ["didn't i tell you she was innocent?", "and the prince and claudio, who accused her, are innocent as well, because they were deceived by don john. margaret is partially guilty, although our investigation shows that she acted unintentionally.", "well, i'm glad that everything has been sorted out.", "me too otherwise i would have had to duel with claudio.", "hero, you and the other women should all retreat to a room. when i send for you, come out wearing masks. the prince and claudio are supposed to be here by now. you know your job, brother. you have to pretend to be your niece's father, and give her away to claudio.", "i'll do that, without giving away our secret.", "friar, i think i need a favor from you.", "what do you need me to do?"], ["to tie me up, or to undo me: one or the other. signior leonato, the truth is, your niece likes me.", "she sees you with the eyes my daughter lent her, it's true.", "and i see her also through the eyes of love.", "and those eyes were endowed with sight by claudio, the prince, and me. but what did you want?", "sir, i'm puzzled by what you just said. but as far as what i want i want you to give beatrice and me your blessing to be married. that, good friar, is where you come in.", "our wishes are aligned, then: i give you my blessing.", "and i'll help you. here comes the prince and claudio.", "good morning to all these lovely people.", "good morning, prince; good morning, claudio. we're waiting here for you. are you still set on marrying my brother's daughter?", "i wouldn't change my mind even if she were ."], ["bring her out, brother. the friar's ready.", "good morning, benedick. what's the matter? your face looks like the month of february full of frost, storms, and cloudiness.", "i think he's nervous he's about to become the savage bull who got domesticated. oh, don't worry about it we'll dip your in gold and make you pretty, and you'll delight all of europe, just like jove delighted europa when was a bull.", "came to earth lowing for love. a strange bull just like him mated with one of your father's cows and, voil, gave birth to a calf like you you bleat the same as him.", "i'll get you for that one. but here are other matters to be dealt with.", "which is the lady i'm supposed to marry?", "this one, and i will give her to you.", "well, then she's the one for me. sweetheart, let me see your face.", "no, you can't do that until you take her hand and, in front of this friar, swear to marry her."], ["hero give me your hand. with the friar as my witness, i am your husband, if you want me.", "and when i lived, i was your other wife. and when you loved me, you were my other husband.", "it's another hero!", "exactly right. one hero died when she was slandered, but i am alive. and as surely as i am alive, i am a virgin.", "it's the former hero! the hero that died!", "she was only dead, my lord, as long as her slander lived.", "i can confirm that all these shocking things are true. after the wedding ceremony, i'll tell you all about beautiful hero's \"death.\" in the meantime, just accept all these wonderful things, and let's head to the chapel.", "wait a moment, friar. which one of you is beatrice?", "that's my name. what do you want?", "do you love me?", "no, no more than is reasonable.", "well then, your uncle and the prince and claudio have been deceived. they swore you did.", "do you love me?"], ["truly, no no more than is reasonable.", "well then, margaret, ursula, and my cousin have been very much deceived, for they swore you did.", "they swore that you were sick with love for me.", "they swore that you were nearly dead with love for me.", "oh, well. so you don't love me?", "no, i don't except as a friend.", "come on, niece, i'm sure you love him.", "and i'll swear that he loves her. here's a clumsy sonnet, in benedick's handwriting, dedicated to beatrice.", "and here's another poem, which i stole from my cousin's pocket in her handwriting and all about her adoration for benedick.", "what a miracle! our handwriting gives away our hearts. come on, i'll take you, but honestly i'm only doing it out of pity.", "i won't say no to you, but let it be known that i'm only doing this after a lot of persuasion and to save your life i hear you were quickly wasting away without me.", "oh, shut up! i'll stop your mouth with a kiss."], ["how does it feel to be benedick the married man?", "i'll tell you what, prince: a whole university full of wisecrackers couldn't change my mood today. you think i care what i'm called? well, i don't. if a man is always afraid of what others think, he won't even dare to dress nicely, because he'll be afraid people will talk about him. in short, since i intend to get married, i won't hear anyone say a bad thing about it. so don't go making fun of me for what i said before. man is a giddy, flighty thing: that's my conclusion. and claudio though i'm sure i would have beaten you in our duel since you're likely to become my relative, i'll let you go, unbruised, and love my cousin hero.", "i was sort of hoping you would say no to beatrice, so that i could have smacked you out of your single life and made you a . which you'll probably turn into anyway, if my cousin beatrice doesn't keep you on a short leash.", "come on, we're all friends. let's do a dance, and have some fun, before we're wed.", "we'll dance after the wedding.", "no, before! musicians, play us a song. prince, you look sad. you should get a wife! your royal staff would be so much more impressive if it were topped off by a ."], ["don pedro my lord, your brother john was caught by armed soldiers as he fled. he's been brought back to messina.", "don pedro leave him till tomorrow. i'll think of some awful punishment for him. play on, musicians!"]], [["come on, don't tell me that. i don't like it that you knew about this, iago. all this time i've thought you were such a good friend that i've let you spend my money as if it was yours.", "damn it, you're not listening to me! i never dreamed this was happening if you find out i did, you can go ahead and hate me.", "you told me you hated him.", "i do hate , i swear. three of venice's most important noblemen took their hats off to him and asked him humbly to make me his lieutenant, the second in command. and i know my own worth well enough to know i deserve that position. but he wants to have things his own way, so he sidesteps the issue with a lot of military talk and refuses their request. \"i've already chosen my lieutenant,\" he says. and who does he choose? a guy who knows more about numbers than fighting! this guy from florence named michael cassio. he has a pretty wife but he can't even control her. and he's definitely never commanded men in battle. he's got no more hands-on knowledge of warfare than an old woman unless you count what he's read in books,"], ["which any peace-lover can do. his military understanding is all theory, no practice. but cassio's been chosen over me. my career is cut short by some bookkeeper, even though the general saw my fighting skills first-hand in rhodes and cyprus. this accountant is now lieutenant, while i end up as the flag-bearer.", "by god, i'd rather be his executioner.", "and there's nothing i can do about it. that's the curse of military service. you get promoted when someone likes you, not because you're next in line. now, you tell me: should i feel loyal to the moor?", "if you don't like him you should quit.", "no, calm down. i'm serving under him to take advantage of him. we can't all be masters, and not all masters should be followed. look at all the devoted servants who work for their masters their whole lives for nothing but their food, and then when they get old they're terminated. they ought to be whipped for being so stupid. but then there's another kind of servant who looks dutiful and devoted, but who's really looking out for himself. by pretending to serve their lords, these men get rich, and when they've saved up enough they can be their own masters. guys like that have soul, and that's the kind of guy i am. let me tell"], ["you, as sure as your name's roderigo, if i were the moor i wouldn't want to be iago. i may seem to love and obey him, but in fact, i'm just serving him to get what i want. if my outward appearance started reflecting what i really felt, soon enough i'd be wearing my heart on my sleeve for birds to peck at. no, it's better to hide it. i'm not who i appear to be.", "sure is lucky if he can pull this off!", "let's shout up to desdemona's father, wake him, pester him, spoil his happiness, spread rumors about him in the streets, enrage his relatives, and irritate him endlessly. however real his happiness is, it will vanish in light of this.", "here's her father's house. i'll call out.", "do it, and shout like the city's on fire.", "hey, brabantio! signor brabantio, hey!", "wake up, brabantio! wake up! thieves! thieves! check on your daughter, your house, your money! thieves! thieves!"], ["what's the reason for this horrible shouting? what's the matter?", "sir, is everyone in your family at home?", "are your doors locked?", "why are you asking me that?", "for god's sake, sir, you've been robbed. get dressed. your heart's going to break. it's like half your soul's been ripped out. at this very minute an old black ram is having sex with your little white lamb. wake up, wake up, ring a bell and wake up all the snoring citizens. if you wait too long you'll have black grandchildren. get up, i tell you!", "are you crazy?", "do you recognize my voice, noble lord?", "not me. who are you?", "my name's roderigo.", "i told you not to hang around my house. i've already told you quite plainly that my daughter will never marry you. now you come here drunk to make trouble and startle me out of a sound sleep?", "sir, sir, sir"], ["you know i'm powerful enough to make you pay for this.", "please wait, sir.", "why are you talking about robbery? this is venice. my house isn't in some remote countryside.", "brabantio, with all due respect, i'm here out of courtesy and good will. i've come to tell you", "my god, sir, you're stubborn and suspicious. we come here to help you and you treat us like thugs, but you let an african horse climb all over your daughter. your grandsons will neigh to you like horses. your whole family will be ruined.", "what kind of crude jerk are you?", "the kind that tells you that the moor is having sex with your daughter right now.", "you're a villain!", "you're a senator!", "you're going to pay for this, roderigo. i know who you are.", "i'll answer for everything. i don't know if you know or approve of this, but in the wee hours of the morning your daughter left your house, with no better escort than a hired gondolier, to go into the rough embrace of a lustful moor. if all of this happened with your"], ["approval, then we've been very rude to bother you like this. but if you didn't know about it, then you were wrong to get mad at us. i'd never play pranks on you. if you didn't allow your daughter to do what she's doing, then she's rebelling against you. she's throwing her life away on some stranger. go ahead, see for yourself if she's in her bedroom. if she is, you can sue me for lying to you.", "light the candles! wake up my whole household! i dreamt about this. i'm starting to worry it's true. give me some light!", "roderigo it's time for me to say goodbye to you. it would be inappropriate dangerous, even for me to be seen working against the moor, as i would if i stayed. the venetian government might reprimand him for this, but it can't safely get rid of him, since it needs him urgently for the imminent cyprus wars. they couldn't find another man with his abilities to lead their armed forces not if their souls depended on it. i hate him, but i've got to show him signs of loyalty"], ["and affection, even if it's just an act. if you want to find him, send the search party to the sagittarius inn. he and i will be there.", "it's true. she's gone. the rest of my life will be nothing but bitterness. now, roderigo, where did you see her? oh, that miserable wretch! you say you saw her with the moor? oh, who would want to be a father? how did you know it was her? to think she tricked me so easily! what did she say to you? get me more candles, and wake up all my relatives. do you think they're married?", "yes, i really think so.", "oh, heaven, how did she get out? my own flesh and blood rebels against me! fathers, never trust your daughters just because they act obedient and innocent. are there magic spells that can lead young virgins astray? have you ever heard of anything like that, roderigo?", "yes, sir, i have.", "call my brother. now i wish you'd married her! some of you go one way, some the other way. do you know where we can find her and the moor?", "i think i can find him. get together a group of armed men and follow me."], ["lead the way. i'll stop at every house. i'm respected enough that most of them will do what i say. get your weapons! and get the officers who guard the city at night. let's go, roderigo. i'll reward you for your troubles."], ["i've killed many men in battle, but i still believe it's deeply wrong to murder someone. sometimes i worry i'm not cruel enough for this job. nine or ten times i wanted to stab him under the ribs.", "it's better that you didn't kill him.", "but he kept chattering so foolishly, talking about you in such insulting and despicable terms, that it was hard for me to restrain myself. but please tell me, sir, is your marriage ? brabantio is an important man in this city, almost as powerful as the duke himself. he'll try to annul your marriage, or else inflict whatever punishment the law and his power will allow him to.", "let him do his worst. the services i have done for the venetian government will count for more than his complaints will. no one knows this yet and i don't like to brag, but i come from a royal family, and i'm as noble as the woman i've married. and let me tell you, iago, if i didn't love desdemona as much as i do, i'd never agree to get married and lose my freedom at all. but look at those lights. who's coming?"], ["that's her father and his friends, who've been roused out of bed. you'd better go inside.", "no, i must let them find me. my good qualities, my legal status as desdemona's husband, and my innocence will protect me. is it them?", "i don't think so.", "the servants of the duke and my lieutenant? hello, everyone! what's going on?", "the duke sends his regards. he needs to see you right away.", "what do you think he wants?", "something about cyprus. i think it's important. the warships have sent a dozen messages tonight, one after the other, and many of the senators have been awakened and are at the duke's already. they're very anxious for you to get there. when you weren't at home, the senate sent out three different search parties to find you.", "it's good you found me. i'll just speak a word or two here in the house and then i'll go with you."], ["ensign, what's he doing in there?", "tonight he boarded a treasure ship. if he can keep it, he'll be set forever.", "i don't understand.", "he's married.", "to whom?", "to", "are you ready?", "yes, i'll go with you now.", "here comes another group looking for you.", "it's brabantio. look out, sir. he intends to do something bad to you.", "hey! stop right there!", "sir, it's the moor.", "get him, he's a thief!"], ["you, roderigo! come on, i'll fight you.", "put away your swords. they'll get rusty in the dew. sir, your age and status inspire more respect than your weapons do.", "you evil thief, where have you hidden my daughter? you devil, you've put a spell on her! anybody with eyes could tell you that a beautiful and happy young girl like her, who's refused to marry all of the handsome young men of the city, wouldn't run off with a black thing like you unless she'd been bewitched. you're something to fear, not to love. it's obvious to everyone that you've tricked her, drugged her, or kidnapped her. that's probably what happened, so i'm arresting you. arrest this man as a practitioner of black magic. grab him. if he struggles, use force!", "just a minute. i don't need anyone to tell me when to fight. you've accused me of some serious crimes. where do you want me to go to respond to these charges?"], ["to prison, until you're called into court.", "what if i do what you say? how would i satisfy the duke then? his messengers are waiting here to take me to him immediately, on pressing state business.", "it's true. the duke's in a meeting right now, and he's sent for you too.", "the duke's in a meeting? at this time of night? bring him with us. the law's on my side. the duke and any of my fellow senators will take this wrong as seriously as if it were their own. if we let crimes like this happen, slaves and heathens will be our rulers."], ["these reports are inconsistent. you can't trust them.", "it's true, they're inconsistent. my letters say there are a hundred and seven ships.", "and mine say a hundred and forty.", "and mine say two hundred. but often in these cases, reports are just estimates. the important thing is that they all say a turkish fleet is approaching cyprus.", "yes, we get the idea. the inconsistency doesn't make me think that the reports are all wrong. i have no doubt about what they're basically saying, and it's frightening.", "hello! hey, hello!", "it's a messenger from the warships.", "why are you here?", "signor angelo told me to come here and tell you that the turkish fleet is heading for rhodes, not cyprus."], ["what do you think about this change?", "they can't have changed; there's no way this could be true. it's a trick to confuse us. think about how important cyprus is to the turks, and remember that they could capture cyprus more easily, since it isn't as well protected as rhodes is. if we keep these things in mind, we can't possibly imagine that the turks would be so incompetent as to put off for last what they want to achieve first, setting aside something easy and profitable to do something dangerous and pointless.", "no, i think we can be confident that the turks aren't really headed for rhodes.", "here's some more news coming in.", "sir, the turks sailed to rhodes, where they joined with another fleet.", "that's just what i thought. how many, can you guess?", "thirty ships. now they've turned around and are clearly heading for cyprus. signor montano, your brave and loyal servant, gives you this information and asks you to send reinforcements to relieve him."], ["then it's certain they're heading for cyprus. is marcus luccicos in town?", "no, he's in florence.", "write to him immediately. hurry.", "here come brabantio and the brave moor.", "brave othello, i have to send you right away to fight the turks, our great enemy. brabantio oh, i didn't see you there. welcome, sir. i could have used your wisdom and help tonight.", "i could have used yours as well. forgive me, your grace. i didn't get out of bed and come here in the dead of night because i heard about the war or because i was worried about the city's defense. i have a personal problem so painful and gut-wrenching that it overwhelms everything else.", "why, what's the matter?", "it's my daughter! oh, my daughter!", "is she dead?", "she's dead to me. she's been tricked and stolen from me, enchanted by black magic spells. she must've"], ["been tricked or drugged, because there's no way she could have made this mistake on her own.", "whoever tricked your daughter and stole her from you will pay for it. and you yourself will determine the sentence as you see fit, and impose the death penalty if you choose to, even if the criminal were my own son.", "i humbly thank you, sir. here is the man, the moor. it seems you had your own reasons for summoning him here.", "we're sorry to hear this.", "othello what do you have to say for yourself?", "nothing, but this is true.", "noble, honorable gentlemen whom i serve: it's true that i've taken this man's daughter from him and married her. but that's my only offense. there's nothing more. i'm awkward in my speech and i'm not a smooth talker. from the time i was seven years old until nine months ago i've been fighting in battles. i don't know much about the world apart from fighting. so i won't do myself much good by speaking in my own defense. but if you'll let me, i'll tell you the plain"], ["story of how we fell in love, and what drugs, charms, spells, and powerful magic because that's what i'm being accused of i used to win his daughter.", "she's a good girl, quiet and obedient. she blushes at the slightest thing. and you want me to believe that despite her young age and proper upbringing she fell in love with a man she'd be afraid to look at? the very thought of it is ridiculous. you'd have to be stupid to think that someone so perfect could make such an unnatural mistake as that. the devil must be behind this. therefore i say again that he must have used some powerful drug or magic potion on her.", "your saying this isn't proof. there has to be clear evidence that he's done this, not just these accusations.", "tell us, othello. did you trick or deceive this lady in some way? or did you agree to this as equals?", "please, send for desdemona to come here from the sagittarius inn and ask her to speak about me in front"], ["of her father. if she has anything bad to say about me, then you can sentence me to death.", "bring desdemona here.", "iago, bring desdemona here. you know where she is.", "in the meantime i'll tell you all, as honestly as i confess my sins to god, how i wooed this beautiful lady, and how she came to love me.", "tell us, othello.", "her father loved me and used to invite me to his house often, continually asking me about my life and all the battles i've fought. i told him everything, from my boyhood up until the time when i was talking to him. i told him about unfortunate disasters, hair-raising adventures on sea and on land, and near-catastrophes and dangerous adventures i've been through. i told him how i was captured and sold as a slave, how i bought my freedom, and how i wandered through caves and deserts. i was able to tell him about cannibals who eat each other, and men with heads growing below their shoulders. when i talked about all these things, desdemona used to listen attentively. if she had to go do some household chore, i noticed that she'd always come back quickly to hear more of my stories."], ["when i was relaxing, she'd pull me aside and ask to hear some part of a story she had missed. her eyes would fill with tears at the bad things i went through in my younger years. when my stories were done, she'd sigh and tell me how strangely wonderful and sad my life had been. she said she wished she hadn't heard it, but she also wished there was a man like me for her. she thanked me and told me that if a friend of mine had a story like mine to tell, she'd fall in love with him. i took the hint and spoke to her. she said she loved me for the dangers i'd survived, and i loved her for feeling such strong emotions about me. that's the only witchcraft i ever used. here comes my wife now. she'll confirm everything.", "i think a story like that would win my own daughter over. brabantio, i urge you to make the best of this. try to accept what's happened."], ["please let her speak. if she admits she wanted this, then i won't blame othello. come here, my child. who do you obey here?", "father, this isn't easy for me. i'm torn. i owe you respect because you gave me life and education. you're the one i have to obey. i'm your daughter. but this man here is my husband now, and i owe him as much as my mother owed you, just as she preferred you to her own father. so i have to give my obedience to the moor, my husband.", "i'm finished, then. duke, please go ahead with your state business. i'd rather adopt a child than have one of my own. come here, moor. i'm forced to give my blessing to this marriage. with all my heart, i give you that thing which, if you didn't already have it, i'd try with all my heart to keep from you. desdemona, i'm glad you're my only child, since if i had others i'd keep them all locked up. you would have made me treat them like a tyrant. i'm done, my lord.", "let me refer to a proverb that may help you forgive these lovers: if you can't change something, don't cry about it. when you lament something bad that's already happened, you're setting yourself up for more"], ["bad news. a robbery victim who can smile about his losses is superior to the thief who robbed him, but if he cries he's just wasting time.", "so if the turks steal cyprus from us, it won't be bad as long as we keep smiling. it's easy to accept platitudes like that if you haven't lost anything. but i've lost something precious, and i have to put up with the platitude as well as suffering my loss. talk is cheap. i've never heard of someone feeling better because of someone else's words. please, i'm asking you, go ahead and get back to your state affairs.", "the turks are heading for cyprus with a powerful fleet. othello, you understand better than anyone how the defenses for cyprus work. even though we have a very good officer in charge there already, everyone says you're the better man for the job. so i'll have to ask you to put a damper on your marriage celebrations and take part in this dangerous expedition.", "i've gotten used to the hardships of a military life. i rise to the occasion when faced with difficulties. i will take charge of this war against the turks. but i humbly ask you to make appropriate arrangements for my wife,"], ["giving her a place to live and people to keep her company that suit her high rank.", "she can stay at her father's house.", "i won't allow it.", "neither will i.", "and i wouldn't stay there. i don't want to upset my father by being in his house. dear duke, please listen to what i have to say.", "what do you want to do, desdemona?", "when i fell in love with othello i made up my mind that i wanted to live with him. you can see how much i wanted to be with him by how violently i threw away my old life. i feel like i'm a part of him now, and that means i'm part of a soldier. i saw othello's true face when i saw his mind. i gave my whole life to him because of his honor and bravery. if i were left at home uselessly while he went off to war, then i'm separated from my husband in his natural element. i'd be miserable without him. let me go with him.", "please allow her to do this. i'm not asking to have her near me for sex i'm too old for that, and my sexual"], ["urges are dead. i want this because she wants it i love her for her mind. and i'd never want you to think that i'd neglect my serious official duties while she was there with me. if i ever let love blind me so that i choose to lounge around in bed with my loved one instead of going off to war, then you can let a housewife use my helmet as a frying pan. my reputation would be disgraced if i ever acted like that.", "you can decide that privately. i don't care whether she stays or goes. what's important is the urgency of this mission. you've got to act fast.", "you'll have to leave tonight.", "with all my heart, i'll go right away.", "we'll meet again at nine in the morning. othello, have one of your officers stay behind to bring you your commission and whatever else is important to you.", "my lord, my ensign is an honest and trustworthy man. he'll accompany my wife, and bring whatever else you think i might need."], ["all right, then. good night, everyone. brabantio sir, if goodness is beautiful, your son-in-law is beautiful, not black.", "goodbye, black moor. treat desdemona well.", "keep an eye on her, moor. she lied to me, and she may lie to you.", "i'd bet my life she'd never lie to me. iago, i'm leaving my dear desdemona with you. have your wife attend to her, and bring them along as soon as you can. come on, desdemona, i've only got an hour of love to spend with you, to tell you what you need to do. we're on a tight schedule.", "iago.", "what do you have to say, noble friend?", "what do you think i should do?", "go to bed, and sleep.", "i'm going to go drown myself."], ["if you do that, i'll never respect you again. why, you silly man!", "it's silly to live when life is torture. the only cure is death.", "oh, how stupid! i've been alive for twenty-eight years, and i've never met a man who knew what was good for him. i'd rather be a baboon than kill myself out of love for some woman i can't have.", "what should i do? i know it's foolish to be so much in love, but i can't help it.", "can't help it? nonsense! what we are is up to us. our bodies are like gardens and our willpower is like the gardener. depending on what we plant weeds or lettuce, or one kind of herb rather than a variety, the garden will either be barren and useless, or rich and productive. if we didn't have rational minds to counterbalance our emotions and desires, our bodily urges would take over. we'd end up in ridiculous situations. thankfully, we have reason to cool our raging lusts. in my opinion, what you call love is just an offshoot of lust.", "i don't believe it.", "you feel love because you feel lust and you have no willpower. come on, be a man. drown yourself? drowning is for cats or blind puppies don't drown yourself! i've told you i'm your friend, and i'll stick by you."], ["i've never been more useful to you than i will be now. here's what you'll do. sell all your assets and your land, and turn it into cash. desdemona can't continue loving the moor any more than he can continue loving her. she fell in love with him very suddenly, and they'll break up just as suddenly. moors are moody people. so sell your lands and raise a lot of cash. what seems sweet to him now will soon turn bitter. she'll dump othello for a younger man. when she's had enough of the moor's body, she'll realize her mistake. she'll need to have a new lover. she'll have to have it. so have your money ready. if you want to go to hell, there are better ways to do it than killing yourself. raise all the money you can. i can get the better of religion and a few flimsy vows between a misguided barbarian and a depraved venetian girl. you'll get to sleep with her just put together some money. and to hell with drowning yourself! that's completely beside the point. if you're ready to die, you can risk death by committing crimes in an attempt to get the woman you want. don't just give up on her and drown yourself.", "can i count on you if i wait to see what happens?", "you can trust me. go now and get cash. i told you before, and i'll tell you again and again: i hate the moor. i'm devoted to my cause of hating him, just as devoted as you are to yours. so let's join forces and get revenge. if you seduce desdemona and make a fool out of him, it'll be fun for both of us. many things may happen. go get money. we'll speak again tomorrow. goodbye.", "where will we meet in the morning?"], ["at my house.", "i'll be there early.", "go home. goodbye. oh, and one more thing", "what is it?", "no more talk about killing yourself, okay?", "i've changed my mind about that.", "go then, goodbye. put a lot of cash together.", "i'm going to sell all my land.", "that's how i always do it, getting money from fools. i'd be wasting my skills dealing with an idiot like that if i couldn't get something useful out of him. i hate the moor, and there's a widespread rumor that he's slept with my wife. i'm not sure it's true, but just the suspicion is enough for me. he thinks highly of me. that'll help. cassio's a handsome man. let's see, how can i"], ["get his position and use him to hurt othello at the same time? how? how? let's see. after a while i'll start telling othello that cassio is too intimate with desdemona. cassio is a smooth talker and a good-looking guy, the sort of man that people would expect to be a seducer. the moor is open and straightforward. he thinks any man who seems honest is honest. people like that are easy to manipulate. so it's all decided. i've worked it out. with a little help from the devil, i'll bring this monstrous plan to success."], ["what can you see out on the ocean?", "nothing. the water's so rough that i can't see any sails, either in the bay or on the ocean.", "it was windy on shore too. a big blast of wind shook our fortifications. how could a ship made out of wood hold together in those mountainous waves? what do you think will be the result of this storm?", "the turkish navy will be broken up. the wind's whipping up the waves so high you expect them to reach the clouds and splash against the stars in the sky. i've never seen the waters so disturbed.", "if the turkish fleet isn't protected in some harbor, their men must all be drowned. no ship could survive this storm."], ["i've got news, boys, the war's over! this terrible storm has smashed the turks so badly that their plans are ruined. one of our ships has reported that it saw most of their fleet shipwrecked.", "what? is this true?", "the ship's sailing into harbor now; it's from verona. michael cassio, lieutenant of the moor othello, has arrived on shore. the moor himself is still at sea. he's been commissioned to come here to cyprus.", "i'm happy about that. he'll be a good governor.", "cassio brings good news about the turkish defeat, but he's worried about the othello's safety. the two of them were separated during the storm.", "i hope to god othello's all right. i served under him, and i know what an excellent commander he is. let's go to the shore to get a look at the ship that came in, and to look out for othello's ship. we'll stare out at the sea until the sea and the sky blur together.", "let's do that. every minute we expect more ships to arrive."], ["thanks, you brave men who defend this island and respect othello. i hope heaven protects him from the weather, because i lost sight of him on the stormy sea.", "is his ship sturdy?", "yes, it's well built, and the ship's pilot is very expert and experienced. for that reason i still have some hope for him, even though i don't have my hopes up too high.", "a sail! a sail! a sail!", "what's all that shouting about?", "everybody in town is down at the shore shouting \"a sail!\"", "i hope it's othello.", "they've fired a greeting shot, so at least it's a friendly ship.", "please go find out for certain who has arrived.", "i'll do that."], ["good lieutenant, is your general married?", "yes, and he's very lucky to have married the woman he did. his wife defies description. she's god's masterpiece, and she'd exhaust whoever tried to do her justice while praising her.", "who's arrived in the harbor?", "a man named iago, the general's ensign.", "he made good time. you see how the storm, the jagged rocks, and the sand banks that trap ships all appreciate a beautiful woman. they let the heavenly desdemona arrive safe and sound.", "who's that?", "she's the one i was talking about, the general's wife. the brave iago was put in charge of bringing her here, and he's arrived a week sooner than we expected. dear god, please protect othello and help him arrive here safely, so he and desdemona can be in each other's arms, and othello can cheer us up and bring comfort to cyprus."], ["look, the precious desdemona has arrived on shore. we should all kneel before her, men of cyprus! greetings, my lady, and may god always be with you.", "thank you, brave cassio. is there any news about my husband?", "he hasn't arrived yet. as far as i know, he's okay and will arrive here soon.", "oh, but i'm worried. how did you two get separated?", "the storm separated us.", "a sail! a sail!", "listen, they've spotted another ship!", "they fired a greeting shot too, so this is also a friendly ship.", "go find out the news.", "ensign iago, welcome. and welcome to you, too, madam. emilia don't be upset that i kissed your wife hello, iago. it's a courtesy where i come from."], ["if she gave you as much lip as she gives me, you'd be sick of her by now.", "on the contrary, she's a soft-spoken woman.", "no, she talks too much. she's always talking when i want to sleep. i admit that in front of you, my lady, she keeps a bit quiet. but she's scolding me silently.", "you have no reason to say that.", "come on, come on. you women are all the same. you're as pretty as pictures when you're out in public, but in your own houses you're as noisy as jangling bells. in your own kitchens you act like wildcats. you make yourselves sound like saints when you're complaining about something, but you act like devils when someone offends you. you don't take your jobs as housewives seriously, and you're shameless hussies in bed.", "shame on you, you slanderer!", "no, it's true, or if it's not, i'm a villain. you wake up to have fun, and you start work when you go to bed.", "you clearly have nothing good to say about me.", "no, i don't.", "but if you had to say something nice about me, what would you say?"], ["don't make me do it, my lady. i'm critical by nature.", "come on, just try. by the way, has someone gone down to the harbor?", "yes, madam.", "i'm not as happy as i seem. i'm just trying not to show how worried i am about othello's safety. come on, what would you say about me?", "i'm trying to think of something, but i'm not good at inventing clever things. it takes time. ah, i've got it. if a woman is pretty and smart, she uses her good looks to get what she wants.", "very clever! but what if the woman is smart but ugly?", "even if she's ugly, she'll be smart enough to find a guy to sleep with her.", "this is getting worse and worse!", "what if she's pretty but stupid?", "no pretty woman is stupid, because her stupidity will make her more attractive to men.", "these are stupid old jokes that men tell each other in bars. what horrible thing do you have to say about a woman who's both ugly and stupid?", "no matter how ugly or stupid the woman is, she plays the same dirty tricks that the smart and pretty ones do."], ["you don't know a thing! you give your best praise to the worst women. but how would you praise a truly good woman, someone who had no reason to worry about what anyone said about her?", "a woman who was beautiful but never proud, who could speak well but knew when to be quiet, who dressed well but was never overdressed, who had self-restraint even when she could get what she wanted, a woman who never took revenge, who overlooked it when people hurt her, who was too wise to do anything stupid, who could think without revealing her thoughts, and who could refrain from flirting with men in love with her, that kind of woman, if she ever existed, would", "would do what?", "would raise babies and clip coupons.", "oh, that's pathetic! don't listen to him, emilia, even though he's your husband. what do you think about him, cassio? isn't he a horrible man?", "he speaks bluntly, madam. he's more of a soldier than a wise man.", "he's taking her hand. that's right, go ahead and whisper together. this is all i need to get cassio. yes, keep smiling at her, cassio. your fine manners around women will be your downfall. oh, i'm sure you're saying something very clever."], ["if you lose your job because of little flirtations like this, you'll wish you hadn't been so courteous with her. oh, how nice, you're your own hand, one finger at a time? i wish those fingers were enema tubes!", "that's the moor! i recognize his trumpet.", "yes, it is.", "let's go greet him when he lands.", "look, here he comes.", "my beautiful warrior!", "my darling othello!", "i'm amazed you got here before me. but i'm overjoyed! my love, if the calm after the storm could always be this wonderful, i'd want the wind to blow until it waked the dead, and whipped up waves as tall as mountains! if i died right now i'd be completely happy, since i'll probably never be as happy as this again in my life.", "god willing, our love and our happiness will only increase as we get older."], ["amen to that! i can't talk about my happiness anymore. it's too much. i hope these kisses i'm about to give you are the closest we ever come to fighting.", "oh, you're happy now, but i'll ruin your happiness, for all my supposed honesty.", "let's go up to the castle. good news, friends. the war's over and the turks are drowned. how are my old friends from this island doing? honey, they'll love you here in cyprus. they've been very good to me here. oh, my dear, i'm blabbing on and on because i'm so happy. iago, would you be good enough to go get my trunks from the ships? and bring the ship's captain to the castle. he's a good man. let's go, desdemona. i'll say it again: i'm so happy to see you here in cyprus!", "meet me down at the harbor. come here. they say love makes cowards brave. so if you're brave, listen to me. lieutenant cassio will be on guard duty tonight. but first, i have to tell you that desdemona's completely in love with him."], ["with cassio? that's impossible.", "be quiet and listen to me. remember how she fell madly in love with the moor because he bragged and told her made-up stories? did you expect her to keep on loving him for his chattering? you're too smart to think that. no, she needs someone nice-looking. othello's ugly, what pleasure could she find in him? lovemaking gets boring after a while. to keep things hot, she'll need to see someone with a handsome face, someone close to her in age, someone who looks and acts like her. othello isn't any of those things. since he doesn't have these advantages to make him attractive to her, she'll get sick of him until he makes her want to puke. she'll start looking around for a second choice. now, if that's true and it's obviously true who's in a better position than cassio? he's a smooth talker, and uses sophistication and fine manners to hide his lust. nobody's as crafty as he is. besides, he's young and handsome, and he's got all the qualities that nave and silly girls go for. he's a bad boy, and desdemona's got her eye on him already.", "i can't believe that. she's not that kind of woman. she's very moral.", "like hell she is! she's made of the same flesh and blood as everyone else. if she were so moral, she would never have fallen in love with the moor in the first place. good lord! did you notice how she and cassio were fondling each other's hands? did you see that?"], ["yes, i did. but that wasn't romantic, it was just polite manners.", "they were lusting after each other. you could tell by how they were acting that they're going to be lovers. they were so close that their breath was mingling. when two people get that intimate, sex will soon follow. disgusting! but listen to me; let me guide you. i brought you here from venice. be on guard duty tonight. i'll put you in charge. cassio doesn't know you. i'll be nearby. make cassio angry somehow, either by speaking too loud, or insulting his military skills, or however else you want.", "all right.", "he's hot-tempered, and he might try to hit you with his staff. try to get him to do that. that'll allow me to stir up public sentiment against him here in cyprus. i'll get them so riled up that they'll only calm down when cassio's fired. to get what you want, you need to get cassio out of the way. if you don't do that, things are hopeless for you.", "i'll do it, if you help me out.", "i promise i will. meet me in a little while at the citadel. i need to get othello's things from the ship. goodbye.", "goodbye."], ["i think cassio really does love her, and it's perfectly likely that she loves him too. i can't stand the moor, but i have to admit that he's a reliable, loving, and good-natured man. he'd probably be a good husband to desdemona. i love her too, not simply out of lust, but also to feed my revenge. i have a feeling the moor slept with my wife. that thought keeps gnawing at me, eating me up inside. i won't be satisfied until i get even with him, wife for wife. if i can't do that, i can at least make the moor so jealous that he can't think straight. if that piece of venetian trash roderigo can do what i need to carry out my plan, i'll have power over cassio. i'll say bad things about him to the moor. i have a feeling cassio seduced my wife as well. i'll make the moor thank me, love me, and reward me, even though the joke will be on him the whole time. i've got a good plan, though i haven't worked out the details yet. you can never see the end of an evil plan until the moment comes."], ["our noble and courageous general othello having been informed that the turkish fleet has been completely destroyed, invites every man to celebrate our victory. some of you dance, some of you make bonfires, and every man celebrate in whatever way he likes to. for besides the good news, we are also celebrating his marriage. that's the end of the announcement. there will be a feast from five o'clock until eleven. god bless the island of cyprus and our noble general othello!"], ["good michael, keep a careful eye on the guards tonight. let's exercise restraint and not let the party get too wild.", "iago has orders what to do. but i'll see to it personally anyway.", "iago's a good man. goodnight, michael. come talk to me tomorrow as early as you can. come with me, my dear love. now that the wedding's over, we can have the pleasure of consummating our marriage. good night, everyone.", "hello, iago. it's time for us to stand guard.", "not yet, lieutenant. it's not even ten o'clock. the general got rid of us early tonight so he could be with desdemona. i can't blame him. he hasn't spent the night with her yet, and she's beautiful enough to be lover.", "she's an exquisitely beautiful lady.", "and i bet she's good in bed too."], ["yes, she's young and tender.", "and such pretty eyes! like an invitation.", "yes, she's pretty. but she's modest and ladylike too.", "and when she speaks, doesn't her voice stir up passion?", "she's a perfect woman, it's true.", "well, good luck to them tonight in bed! come with us, lieutenant. i've got a jug of wine, and these two cyprus gentlemen want to drink a toast to the black othello.", "not tonight, iago. i'm not much of a drinker. i wish there was less social pressure to drink.", "oh, but these are our friends. just one glass. i'll do most of the drinking for you.", "i've already had a glass of wine tonight, watered down, but look how drunk i am. i'm not a heavy drinker. i wouldn't dare drink much more than that.", "what are you talking about, man? tonight is for celebrating! the gentlemen are waiting.", "where are they?", "by the door. please invite them in.", "i'll do it, but i don't like it."], ["if i can just get him to drink one more glass after what he's drunk already, he'll be as argumentative and eager to fight as a little dog. that fool roderigo, all twisted up inside with love, has been drinking toasts to desdemona by the gallon, and he's on guard duty.i've gotten the rest of the guards drunk, as well as several gentlemen from cyprus who are quick to take offense. now i'll get cassio to do something in front of all these drunkards that will offend everyone on the island. here they come. if the future turns out as i hope it will, i'm all set for success.", "my god, they've given me a lot to drink.", "no, it was a little one, not more than a pint.", "bring in more wine! , . , , ."], ["my god, what a great song!", "i learned it in england, where they have a talent for drinking. the danes, the germans, and the dutch come on, drink, drink! are nothing compared to the english.", "are englishmen really such heavy drinkers?", "they drink danes under the table, and it takes them no effort at all to out-drink germans. and the dutch are vomiting while the english are asking for refills.", "let's drink to our general!", "hear, hear! i'll drink as much as you do!", "oh, sweet england! , . . , .", "god, that song's even better than the other one.", "do you want to hear it again?", "no, because we shouldn't be doing that stuff. oh well, god's in charge, and some people have to go to heaven, while other people have to go to hell.", "that's true, lieutenant."], ["speaking for myself and no offense to the general or anyone else i hope i'm going to heaven.", "me too, lieutenant.", "okay, but please not before me. the lieutenant has to get to heaven before the ensign. but let's stop this drinking and get down to business. god forgive our sins! gentlemen, let's get down to business. by the way, i don't want anyone thinking i'm drunk. this is my ensign. this is my right hand, and this is my left hand. i'm not drunk. i can stand well enough, and i can speak just fine.", "yes, you're speaking very well.", "yes, very well. so don't think that i'm drunk.", "let's go to the platform where we'll stand guard. come on.", "you see that man who just left? he's a good soldier, good enough to be caesar's right-hand man. but he has a serious weakness. it's too bad. i'm worried that othello trusts him too much, and it'll be bad for cyprus eventually.", "but is he often like this?"], ["he drinks like this every night before he goes to sleep. he'd stay up all night and all day if he didn't drink himself to sleep.", "the general should be informed about this. maybe he's never noticed, or he only wants to see cassio's good side. don't you think so?", "roderigo ) hello, roderigo. please, follow the lieutenant. hurry! go!", "and it's too bad that the moor chose a man with such a deep-rooted drinking problem as his second-in-command. we should definitely say something to the moor.", "i wouldn't say anything, not if you gave me the whole island for doing so. i respect cassio and i'd like to help cure his alcoholism", "what's that noise?"], ["damn you, you villain, you rascal!", "what's the matter, lieutenant?", "to think that fool had the nerve to try to teach me manners! i'll beat him until the welts look like basket-weave!", "you'll beat me?", "are you talking, you villain? roderigo", "no, don't hit him, lieutenant! please, sir, restrain yourself. cassio", "let me go, or i'll knock you on the head.", "come on, you're drunk.", "drunk?", "roderigo go tell everyone there's a riot.", "no, lieutenant god, gentlemen help lieutenant sir, montano help, men! the night guard is coming!"], ["who's sounding that alarm? the whole town will riot! god, lieutenant, please stop! you'll be ashamed of this forever!", "what is the matter here?", "my god, i'm bleeding! i've been mortally wounded. i'll kill him!", "stop right now!", "stop! lieutenant sir, montano gentlemen! have you forgotten your duty and your sense of decorum? stop! the general is talking to you! stop, for god's sake!", "how did this all start? have we all become as savage as the turks, treating each other as badly as they would have treated us? for heaven's sake, stop this savage brawl! the next man who swings his sword must not care about his life, because the instant he strikes, he dies. stop that alarm from ringing, it's scaring the islanders. what's the matter here, gentlemen? honest iago, you look upset. speak up and tell me who started this. answer me.", "i don't know. we were all having fun until just a minute ago; we were as happy as a bride and groom taking off their clothes. but then the mood suddenly changed. it was as if something had driven the men insane and made them point their swords at one another. i don't"], ["know what could have started this. i'd rather have lost my legs in battle than be a part of this!", "how did you manage to lose your self-control like this, michael?", "please, excuse me, sir. i can't speak.", "montano, you're supposed to be calm and collected. you're famous for it. wise people respect you. what in the world made you risk your reputation like this and become a street brawler? tell me.", "othello, i've been seriously hurt. your officer iago can tell you what happened. i should save my breath, since it hurts to talk. i didn't do anything wrong that i know of, unless it was a sin to defend myself when someone attacked me.", "all right, now i'm starting to lose my cool. by god, if you don't tell me what happened you'll all suffer. tell me how this fight began, who started it. whoever is guilty, even if he were my twin brother, i swear i'm through with him. we're in a town that's just"], ["avoided a war, everyone's still on edge, and you're getting into private fights while you're supposed to be on guard duty? that's unbelievably bad. iago, who started it?", "i know you're close to cassio, but if you diverge from the truth in any way, you're not a true soldier.", "you're hitting close to home there. i'd rather cut my tongue out of my mouth than say anything bad about michael cassio. but i don't think it'll hurt him to tell the truth. this is what happened, general. montano and i were talking when a man came running, crying for help. cassio was chasing him with his sword out, trying to kill the guy. this gentleman stopped cassio and told him to put away his sword. i followed the guy who was crying for help, to keep him from scaring the public. but he was fast and outran me. when i got back, i heard the swords clinking and cassio swearing. i'd never heard him swear before. they were nearly killing each other, as you saw when you pulled them apart. i can't tell you anything else."], ["but nobody's perfect, and even the best man sometimes loses control and strikes out in rage. cassio was wrong to hurt montano, who was only trying to help him, but i'm sure the guy who ran away must have offended cassio in some terrible way, and cassio couldn't let it pass.", "iago, i know you're fond of cassio and are downplaying this for his benefit. cassio, i love you, but you're never again going to be one of my officers.", "look, you've woken my wife! i'll make you an example for the others to learn from.", "what's the matter, dear?", "everything's fine, now, sweetheart. go back to bed. montano i'll see to it personally that your wounds are treated. lead him off.", "iago, go and calm down the townspeople. come with me, desdemona. unfortunately, it's part of the soldier's life to be woken up by trouble.", "are you hurt, lieutenant?", "yes, but no doctor can help me.", "oh i hope that's not true!"], ["my reputation, my reputation! i've lost my reputation, the longest-living and truest part of myself! everything else in me is just animal-like. oh, my reputation, iago, my reputation!", "i swear i thought you meant you'd been hurt physically. your physical health matters more than your reputation. a reputation is a useless and fake quality that others impose on us. you haven't lost it unless you think you have. there are lots of ways to get on the general's good side again. you've been discharged because he's angry, and because he's obliged to do so for policy reasons, not because he dislikes you. he's got to beat up the weak to frighten the strong. go to him, petition him. he'll change his mind.", "i'd rather ask him to hate me than ask such a good commander to accept such a worthless, drunk, stupid officer as myself. drunk? babbling senselessly? squabbling? swaggering? swearing? ranting and raving to my own shadow! oh, wine is the devil!", "who were you chasing with your sword? what did he do to you?", "i don't know.", "is that possible?", "i remember a jumble of impressions, but nothing distinctly. i remember a fight, but not why we were fighting. oh god, why do men drink and lose their minds? why do we party until we're like animals?"], ["you seem all right now. how did you get better?", "my drunkenness went away when anger took over. one weakness led to another, to make me hate myself.", "come on, you're being too hard on yourself. i wish none of this had happened, given the situation here, and your rank. but since this has happened, you should fix it for your own good.", "i'll ask him for my position back again, and he'll tell me i'm a drunk. even if i had a whole bunch of mouths, i wouldn't be able to answer that. i was a reasonable man, then i became a fool, and finally a beast! oh, how strange! every glass of liquor is damned, and the devil's the main ingredient!", "come on now, wine is good for you, if you know how to use it. don't say anything bad about wine anymore. lieutenant, i think you know i'm your friend.", "i know that, sir. imagine, me, a drunk!", "any man can get drunk sometime. i'll tell you what to do. othello's wife has a lot of influence now. he's completely devoted to her. go open your heart to her. ask her to help you get back your position. she is so generous, kind, and ready to help that she thinks it's wrong not to do everything she can, even more than she is asked to do. ask her to help you heal the rift between her husband and you. i'd bet my lucky stars your problem will be forgotten, and your relationship will be stronger than ever."], ["that's good advice.", "i'm helping you because i like and respect you.", "i believe it completely. early in the morning i'll go visit desdemona and plead my case. my situation is desperate.", "you're doing the right thing. good night, lieutenant. i've got to go to the guard tower.", "good night, honest iago.", "who can say i'm evil when my advice is so good? that's really the best way to win the moor back again. it's easy to get desdemona on your side. she's full of good intentions. and the moor loves her so much he would renounce his christianity to keep her happy. he's so enslaved by love that she can make him do whatever she wants. how am i evil to advise cassio to do exactly what'll do him good? that's the kind of argument you'd expect from satan! when devils are about to commit their biggest sins they put on their most heavenly faces, just like i'm doing now. and while this fool is begging desdemona to help him, and while she's pleading his case to the moor, i'll poison the moor's ear against her, hinting that she's taking cassio's side because of her lust for him. the more she"], ["tries to help cassio, the more she'll shake othello's confidence in her. and that's how i'll turn her good intentions into a big trap to snag them all.", "hello, roderigo!", "i'm totally worn out. my chase is too much for me. i've spent most of my money, and tonight i got beaten up. the upshot is that i've got a little more experience. so with no money, but a little more wisdom, i'm going back to venice.", "you're a poor man if you're this impatient! if you get hurt, does your wound heal immediately? no, it heals gradually. we achieve things with our intelligence, not by magic, and intelligent planning takes time. aren't things going well? cassio's beaten you up, but with that tiny sacrifice on your part, you got cassio discharged! if we're patient, we'll be rewarded with the fruits of our labors. my god, it's morning. all this excitement has made the time fly by. go back to where you're staying and go to sleep. go on, i'm telling you. you'll understand better later. go."], ["now two things still need to be done. my wife has to help make desdemona take cassio's side. i'll put her on that. and i need to take the moor aside right at the moment when cassio's talking to desdemona, so he'll see them together. yes, that's the way i'll do it. let's not ruin a brilliant plan by being slow to act."], ["musicians, start playing here. i'll pay you for your trouble. play something short that will put the general in a good mood.", "your instruments all have a nasal twang. have they been to ?", "excuse me?", "are these wind instruments?", "yes, they are.", "oh, there's the problem.", "what's the problem?", "anyone full of hot air is a problem. but here's some money. the general likes your music a lot, but he asks you to stop playing now.", "well, we'll stop, then."], ["if you've got any music that can't be heard, then play that. but as i said, the general isn't really in the mood to hear music now.", "we don't have any music that can't be heard.", "then pack up your instruments and go away. go!", "do you hear, my friend?", "no, i don't hear your friend. i hear you.", "please don't play games. (cassio clown . there's a bit of gold for you. when the woman taking care of the general's wife wakes up, could you please tell her that cassio asks to speak with her?", "she's awake, sir. if she feels like coming over here, i'll give her your message.", "good to see you, iago.", "you didn't go to sleep, then?", "no. when i left you it was already morning. i've been bold, iago. i've asked to talk to your wife. i'm going to ask her to let me talk to desdemona."], ["i'll send her out to you now. i'll think of a plan to get the moor out of the way, so you can speak more openly.", "i humbly thank you.", "even for a , i never knew someone so kind and honest.", "good morning, lieutenant. i'm sorry about what happened, but i'm sure everything will turn out all right. the general and his wife are talking about it now, and she's defending you strongly. the moor says the man you hurt is very important in cyprus, and that under the circumstances he has no choice but to refuse to reinstate you. but he says he still loves and respects you, and based on his own feelings alone he's looking for an opportunity to safely take you back.", "please find a way to give me some time alone with desdemona, if you think that's all right.", "please come in. i'll take you to a place where you can speak freely.", "thank you very much."], ["iago, give these letters to the ship's captain who brought me here, and ask him to pay my respects to the senate of venice. now that's done, i'm going to walk on the fortification walls. look for me there when you come back.", "i will, my lord.", "shall we go see this fortification, men?", "we're at your service, my lord."], ["i'll do everything i can for you, cassio.", "please do, madam. my husband's so upset about cassio's problem you'd think it was his own.", "your husband's such a good man. don't worry, cassio. i'm sure you and my husband will be as friendly as you were before.", "my dear beautiful lady, whatever happens to michael cassio, he'll always be your humble servant.", "i know that. thank you. you're my husband's friend and you've known him a long time. i assure you the only reason he's keeping away from you now is political.", "yes, my lady. but those political considerations might last such a long time that the general will forget my love and service, especially if i'm gone and someone else has my job.", "that'll never happen. emilia here will be my witness: i promise you that you'll get your position back again. and if i promise to help someone, i do everything i can. my husband will never get a moment's rest, i'll keep him up at night talking about you until he runs out"], ["of patience. he will think that his bed has become a conference table for discussing your problem he won't be able to get away from it. i'll bring up your name at every moment. so cheer up. i'm your advocate, and i'd rather die than give up on you.", "madam, here comes your husband.", "madam, i'd better leave now.", "why not stay and hear me talk to him?", "no, madam. i'm very uncomfortable, and that won't help my case.", "well, do whatever you think best.", "hey! i don't like that.", "what did you say?", "nothing, my lord, or if i did i don't know what.", "wasn't that cassio leaving my wife?", "cassio, my lord? no, i don't think so. he wouldn't sneak away looking so guilty when he saw you coming.", "i really think it was him."], ["what's this, my lord? i was talking to a petitioner here just now, someone who's suffering from your anger.", "who do you mean?", "your lieutenant, cassio. oh, if i've got any influence over you at all, please patch things up with him. in my judgment, this man truly loves you, and his mistake was innocent rather than wicked. please call him and tell him to come back here.", "was that him just now?", "yes. he feels so bad and humble that i feel bad along with him. my love, call him back in here.", "not now, my sweet desdemona. some other time.", "but will it be soon?", "very soon, because you want it.", "will it be tonight at supper?", "no, not tonight.", "then tomorrow at dinner?", "i won't be eating dinner at home. i'll be meeting the captains at the citadel."], ["well then, tomorrow night, or tuesday morning. or tuesday noon or at night, or wednesday morning. please just name a time, but don't wait more than three days. he's very sorry. his mistake was hardly worth punishing him for in the first place though in wartime it is sometimes necessary to make examples out of even the best soldiers. so when should he come? tell me, othello. i can't imagine you asking me for something and me telling you no or standing there muttering. michael cassio came with you when you were trying to win my love. sometimes i'd criticize you to him, and he'd defend you. and now i have to make this big fuss about bringing him back? i swear, i could do so much", "please, no more. he can come whenever he wants. i won't refuse you anything.", "don't act like you're doing me a favor! this is like if i asked you to wear your gloves when it's cold outside, or eat nutritious food, or do something that's good for you. if i ever have to ask you for something that will put your luck to the test, it'll be something difficult and terrible.", "i won't deny you anything! but in return, please, do one thing for me: leave me alone for a little while.", "would i ever deny you anything? no. goodbye, my husband.", "goodbye, my desdemona. i'll come see you right away."], ["come here, emilia. do whatever you feel like doing, my husband, and i'll obey you.", "what a wonderful girl! god help me, i love you! and when i stop loving you, the universe will fall back into the chaos that was there when time began.", "my noble lord", "what is it, iago?", "when you were wooing desdemona, did michael cassio know about it?", "yes, he knew about it the whole time. why do you ask?", "i was just curious. no reason.", "why are you curious, iago?", "i didn't realize he knew her.", "oh, yes. he carried messages back and forth between us very often.", "oh, really?", "oh, really? yes, really. do you see something wrong with that? isn't he an honest man?", "honest, my lord?"], ["honest, yes, honest.", "as far as i know, sir.", "what are you thinking?", "thinking, my lord?", "\"thinking, my lord?\" my god, you keep repeating everything i say as if you were thinking something too horrible to say out loud. you're thinking something. just a minute ago i heard you say you didn't like it when cassio left my wife. what didn't you like? and when i told you he was involved the whole time i was trying to get desdemona, you were like, \"oh, really?\" and then you frowned and wrinkled up your forehead as if you were imagining something horrible. if you're my friend, tell me what you're thinking.", "my lord, you know i'm your friend.", "i think you are. and i know you're full of love and honesty, and you think carefully before you speak. that's why these pauses of yours frighten me. if some fool were withholding things from me, i wouldn't think twice about it. if some lying, cheating villain acted like that, it would just be a trick. but when an honest man acts like that, you know he's wrestling with bad thoughts and can't help it.", "as for michael cassio, i think it would be safe for me to swear that he's honest.", "i think so too."], ["people should be what they appear to be. if they're not honest, they shouldn't look like they are!", "absolutely, people should be what they appear to be.", "in that case, i think cassio's an honest man.", "no, i think there's more to this than you're letting on. please tell me what you're thinking even your worst suspicions.", "please don't make me do that, sir. i have to obey all your orders, but surely i'm not obligated to reveal my deepest thoughts even slaves aren't expected to do that. you want me to say what i'm thinking? what if my thoughts are disgusting and wrong? even good people think horrible things sometimes. who is so pure that they never think a bad thought?", "you're not being a good friend, iago, if you even your friend has been wronged and you don't tell him about it.", "please don't ask me to tell you. i might be completely wrong. i have a bad tendency to be suspicious of people and to look too closely into what they're doing. often i imagine crimes that aren't really there. you would be wise to ignore my weak guesses and imaginary suspicions, and don't worry yourself about the meaningless things i've noticed. for me to tell you my thoughts would only destroy your peace of mind, and"], ["it wouldn't be wise, honest, or responsible for me to tell them.", "what are you talking about?", "a good reputation is the most valuable thing we have men and women alike. if you steal my money, you're just stealing trash. it's something, it's nothing: it's yours, it's mine, and it'll belong to thousands more. but if you steal my reputation, you're robbing me of something that doesn't make you richer, but makes me much poorer.", "i'm going to find out what you're thinking.", "you can't find that out, even if you held my heart in your hand you couldn't make me tell you. and as long my heart's inside my body, you never will.", "what?", "beware of jealousy, my lord! it's a green-eyed monster that makes fun of the victims it devours. the man who knows his wife is cheating on him is happy, because at least he isn't friends with the man she's sleeping with. but think of the unhappiness of a man who worships his wife, yet doubts her faithfulness. he suspects her, but still loves her.", "oh, what misery!", "the person who's poor and contented is rich enough. but infinite riches are nothing to someone who's always afraid he'll be poor. god, help us not be jealous!"], ["why are you telling me this? do you think i would live a life of jealousy, tormented by new suspicions every hour? no. if there's any doubt, there is no doubt. i might as well be a goat if i ever let myself become obsessed with the kind of suspicions you're implying. if you say my wife is beautiful, eats well, loves good company, speaks freely, sings, plays music, and dances well, you're not making me jealous. when a woman is virtuous, talents like these just make her better. and i'm not going to start feeling inferior. she had her eyes wide open when she chose me. no, iago, i'll have to see some real evidence before i start suspecting her of anything bad, and when i suspect her, i'll look for proof, and if there's proof, that's when i'll let go of my love and my jealousy.", "i'm glad to hear you say that. now i can show you my devotion and my duty with more honesty. so please listen to me. i'm not talking about proof yet. watch your wife. watch how she is with cassio. just watch don't be either completely suspicious or completely trustful. i wouldn't want to see you taken advantage of because you're such an open and trusting guy. watch out! i know the people of venice well. they let god see things they wouldn't show their husbands. they don't avoid doing things that are wrong, they just try not to get caught.", "do you really think so?"], ["she lied to her father to marry you. and when she pretended to be afraid of you, she loved you the most.", "that's right, she did.", "well, there you go. she was so young, but she deceived her father so thoroughly he thought it was witchcraft! but i'm sorry i've blurted all this out. i beg your pardon for loving you too much.", "i'm indebted to you forever.", "you seem a little depressed about this.", "not at all, not at all.", "really, i'm afraid you are. i hope you remember that i said all this because i love you. but i see you're troubled. please don't take what i said more seriously than it deserves to be taken.", "i won't.", "if you take it too seriously, it'll have bad effects that i didn't want it to have. cassio's a good friend of mine my lord, i can see you're upset."], ["no, not too upset. i'm sure desdemona would never cheat on me.", "i hope she never does! and i hope you keep on thinking she wouldn't.", "but still, it's true that good things can go bad, away from their true natures", "that's the point i'm trying to make. if i can be frank with you, she veered away from her own nature in turning down all those young men from her own country, with her skin color, with her status everything her nature would have drawn her to ugh! you can almost smell the dark and ugly desires inside her, the unnatural thoughts but i'm sorry i didn't mean to refer to her specifically just now. i only worry that she might snap back to her natural taste in men one day, and compare you unfavorably to other italians.", "goodbye, goodbye. if you see anything else, let me know. tell your wife to watch her. leave me alone now, iago.", "my lord, i'll say goodbye now.", "why did i ever get married? i'm sure this good and honest man sees and knows more, much more, than he's telling me.", "my lord, please don't think about this any more. time will tell. it's right for cassio to have his lieutenancy back he's very talented. but keep him away for a while, and you'll see how he goes about getting it back. notice whether your wife insists on your"], ["giving it back to him. that will tell you a lot. but in the meantime, just assume that i'm paranoid as i'm pretty sure i am and keep thinking she's innocent, please.", "don't worry about how i handle it.", "i'll say goodbye once more.", "this iago is extremely honest and good, and he knows a lot about human behavior. if it turns out that she really is running around on me, i'll send her away, even though it'll break my heart. maybe because i'm black, and i don't have nice manners like courtiers do, or because i'm getting old but that's not much she's gone, and i've been cheated on. i have no choice but to hate her. oh what a curse marriage is! we think our beautiful wives belong to us, but their desires are free! i'd rather be a toad in a moldy basement than to have only a part of someone i love, sharing the rest of her with others. this is the plague of important men our wives betray us more than those of poor men. it's our destiny, like death. we are destined to be betrayed when we are born. oh, here she comes.", "if she's cheated on me, then heaven itself is a fake. i don't believe it."], ["what's going on, othello, darling? the nobles of cyprus whom you invited to dinner are waiting for you.", "i'm sorry.", "why are you whispering? are you sick?", "i have a , right here in my forehead.", "that's from lack of sleep. it'll go away. let me wrap up your head, and it will feel okay in less than an hour.", "no, your handkerchief's too little. leave my head alone.", "come on, i'll escort you to dinner.", "i'm very sorry you're not feeling well.", "i'm glad i found this handkerchief. it's the first keepsake the moor gave her. my stubborn husband has asked me to steal it a"], ["hundred times. but she loves it so much (since othello told her she should always keep it with her) that she always keeps it near her to kiss it and talk to it. i'll copy the embroidery pattern and then give it to iago. heaven knows what he's going to do with it. i only try to satisfy his whims.", "what's going on? what are you doing here alone?", "don't snap at me. i've got something for you.", "you've got something for me? it's a common", "what?", "to have a stupid wife.", "oh, is that so? and what would you give me for the handkerchief?", "what handkerchief?", "what handkerchief? the one the moor gave to desdemona, which you asked me to steal so many times.", "you stole it from her?", "no, actually. she dropped it carelessly, and, seizing the opportunity, since i was here, i picked it up. look, here it is."], ["good girl, give it to me.", "and what are you going to do with it? why did you want it so much that you begged me to steal it?", "what's it to you?", "if you don't need it for some important reason, then give it back to me. poor lady, she'll go crazy when she sees it's missing.", "don't admit to knowing anything about it. i need it. now go, leave me.", "i'll leave this handkerchief at cassio's house and let him find it.to a jealous man, a meaningless little thing like this looks like absolute proof. this handkerchief may be useful to me. the moor's mind has already become infected with my poisonous suggestions. ideas can be like poisons. at first they hardly even taste bad, but once they get into your blood they start burning like hot lava.", "here he comes. no drugs or sleeping pills will ever give you the restful sleep that you had last night.", "argh! she's cheating on me?", "oh, general, please, no more of that!"], ["get lost! you've tortured me with these thoughts. it is better to be tricked completely than to only suspect a little.", "what's with you, my lord?", "i had no idea she was cheating on me. i never saw it or suspected it, so it never hurt me. i slept well, ate well, and was happy. i never saw cassio's kisses on her lips. a man who's robbed, but doesn't miss what's stolen, isn't robbed at all.", "i'm sorry to hear this.", "i would've been happy if the whole army had had sex with her, the lowest-ranking grunts and all, as long as i didn't know anything about it. oh, goodbye to my peace of mind! goodbye to my happiness! goodbye to the soldiers and to the wars that make men great! goodbye! goodbye to the horses and the trumpets and the drums, the flute and the splendid banners, and all those proud displays and pageantry of war! and you deadly cannons that roar like thunderbolts thrown by the gods, goodbye! othello's career is over.", "is this possible, my lord?", "you villain, you'd better be able to prove my wife's a whore! be sure of it. get me proof i can see. if you can't, trust me, you won't want to feel my rage!"], ["has it come to this?", "show me, or at least prove it beyond the shadow of a doubt. if you can't, your life is worthless!", "my noble lord", "if you're slandering her just to torture me, then it'll be no use to pray for mercy or say you're sorry. you might as well go ahead and commit every unspeakable crime you can think of, because there's nothing you could that would top what you've already done!", "oh, heaven help me! aren't you a rational human being? don't you have any sense at all? goodbye. i resign my official position. i'm such an idiot for always telling the truth! what a horrible world we live in! listen, pay attention, everybody. it's not safe to be straightforward and honest. i'm glad you've taught me this valuable lesson. from now on, i'll never try to help a friend when it hurts him so much to hear the truth.", "no, stop. you should always be honest.", "i should always be wise. honesty's stupid, it makes me lose my friends even when i'm trying to help them.", "i swear, i think my wife's faithful, and i think she's not. i think you're trustworthy one minute and then not the next. i need proof! her reputation was as pure as the snow, but now it's as dirty and black as my own face. as long as there are , i won't stand for this. oh, how i wish i knew the truth!"], ["i see you're all eaten up with emotion. i'm sorry i said anything. you want proof?", "want? yes, i want it, and i'll get it.", "but how? how will you get proof? are you going to hide and watch them having sex?", "death and damnation! oh!", "i think it would be very hard to arrange for them to have sex while you watched. if anyone sees them in bed together besides themselves, i guess we could damn them then. so what can we do? what can i say? what proof is there? it'd be impossible for you to watch them, even if they were as horny as animals in heat and as stupid as drunks. but if you would be willing to accept circumstantial evidence as proof, we can get that.", "give me one good reason to think she's cheating on me.", "i don't like what you're asking me to do. but since i've gotten myself involved this far, because i'm so stupidly honest and because i like you so much, i'll keep going. i recently shared a bed with cassio, and i couldn't sleep because of a raging toothache. well, some people talk in their sleep, and cassio is one of them. i heard him saying, \"sweet desdemona, let's be careful and hide our love,\" in his sleep. and then he grabbed my hand and said, \"oh, my darling!\" and"], ["kissed me hard, as if he were trying to suck my lips off. then he put his leg over mine, and sighed and kissed me, and said, \"damn fate for giving you to the moor!\"", "oh, that's monstrous! monstrous!", "no, it was just a dream.", "but it shows that something has already happened.", "it's a reason for suspicion, even though it's just a dream. and it might back up other evidence that may seem too flimsy.", "i'll tear her to pieces!", "no, be reasonable. we don't have any proof yet. she might still be faithful. just tell me this: have you ever seen her holding a handkerchief with an embroidered strawberry pattern on it?", "yes, i gave her one like that. it was my first gift to her.", "i don't know about that, but i saw a handkerchief like that today. i'm sure it belongs to your wife, and i saw cassio use it to wipe his beard.", "if it's the same one", "if it's the same one, or any one that belongs to her, then together with the other evidence it's pretty strong."], ["oh, i'd kill that bastard cassio forty thousand times if i could! killing him once is not enough revenge. now i see it's true. oh, iago, all the love i felt is gone, vanished in the wind. welcome, hatred and vengeance! get out of my heart, love! my heart feels like it's full of poisonous snakes!", "calm down", "i want blood!", "be patient, i'm telling you. you may change your mind later.", "never, iago. my thoughts of revenge are flowing through me like a violent river, never turning back to love, only flowing toward full revenge that'll swallow them up. i swear to god i'll get revenge.", "don't get up yet. let heaven be my witness i'm putting my mind, my heart, and my hands in othello's control. let him command me, and i'll do whatever he asks, no matter how violent."], ["i accept your devotion with my deepest love. i'll put you to the test right away. within the next three days i want to hear you tell me that cassio's dead.", "my friend cassio is dead. it's done, because you request it. but let her live.", "damn her, the wicked whore! oh, damn her, damn her! come away with me. i'm going inside to think up some way to kill that beautiful devil. you're my lieutenant now.", "i'm yours forever."], ["excuse me, do you know which room lieutenant cassio ?", "i wouldn't dare say he lies anywhere.", "why do you say that?", "he's a soldier. if i accused a soldier of lying, he'd stab me.", "oh, come on. where does he sleep?", "telling you where he's sleeping is like telling you where i'm lying.", "what on earth does that mean?", "i don't know where he's staying, so if i told you he's sleeping here or there, i'd be lying.", "can you ask around and find out?", "i'll go ask questions everywhere.", "find him and tell him to come here. tell him i've spoken to my husband on his behalf, and i think everything will be all right.", "i think i can do that. it's not too much to ask."], ["where could i have lost that handkerchief, emilia?", "i don't know, madam.", "believe me, i'd rather have lost a purse full of gold coins. this would be enough to make my husband suspect me, if he wasn't so free of jealousy.", "he's not jealous?", "who, him? i think all tendencies to jealousy were burned out of him by the sun of his native land.", "look, here he comes.", "i won't leave him alone until he gives cassio his job back. how are you, my lord?", "i'm fine, my lady. oh, it's so hard to pretend! how are you, desdemona?", "i'm fine, my lord.", "give me your . your hand's moist, my lady.", "it's moist because it's still young and inexperienced.", "it says you're fertile, and you've got a giving heart. hot, hot and moist. with a hand like this you need to"], ["fast and pray to stave off temptations. someone with a young sweating hand like this one is bound to act up sooner or later. it's a nice hand, an open one.", "you're right to say that. this was the hand that gave you my heart.", "this hand gives itself away very freely. in the old days, people used to give their hearts to each other when they joined their hands in marriage. but these days, people give each other their hands without their hearts.", "i don't know about that. now, don't forget, you promised me something.", "what did i promise, my dear?", "i sent for cassio to come talk with you.", "i have a bad cold that's bothering me. lend me your handkerchief.", "here, my lord.", "no, the one i gave you.", "i don't have it with me.", "you don't?", "no, my lord.", "that's not good. an egyptian woman gave that handkerchief to my mother. she was a witch, and she could"], ["almost read people's thoughts. she told my mother that as long as she kept it with her, my father would love and desire her. but if she lost it or gave it away, my father would start hating her and looking at other women. when she was dying she gave it to me and told me to give it to my wife when i got married. i did. so pay attention. treat it as something precious. losing it or giving it away would be an unspeakable loss, a loss like none other.", "is that possible?", "yes, it's true. there's magic in its fabric. a two-hundred-year-old witch sewed it while she was in a fevered trance. the silk came from sacred silkworms, and it was dyed with fluid made from embalmed virgins' hearts.", "really? is that true?", "it's absolutely true, so take good care of it.", "i wish i had never seen it!", "ha! why?", "why are you yelling at me so angrily?", "is it lost? is it gone? tell me, is it missing?", "god help me!"], ["what do you have to say for yourself?", "it's not lost, but what if it were?", "what do you mean?", "i'm telling you, it's not lost.", "then bring it here. let me see it.", "i could, sir. but i don't want to now. this is just a trick to take my mind off what i'm asking you for. please hire cassio again.", "bring me the handkerchief my mind is full of doubt.", "come on. you know you'll never find a more capable man.", "the handkerchief!", "he's counted on your friendship for his success. he's shared dangers with you", "the handkerchief!", "really, i don't think you're behaving very well.", "damn it!", "and you say he's not jealous?"], ["i never saw him like this before. there must be some magic in that handkerchief. i'm miserable that i lost it.", "men are all the same, but it takes longer than a year or two to see how bad they are. they're like stomachs and we're just the food. they eat us up hungrily, and when they're full, they vomit us up. look, here comes cassio and my husband.", "there's no other way. she's the one who's got to do it. and what luck, she's here! go ahead and ask her.", "hello, cassio. how are you?", "nothing, madam. just my earlier request. i'm begging you to help me get back on his good side. i'm devoted to him with all my heart. i can't wait any longer. if my wrongdoing was so serious that i can't get back into his good graces either by my past service, or my present situation, or the promise of devoted service in the future, just knowing that would help me. then i could stop wondering, and find some other career."], ["i'm sorry, dear cassio, but now is not the right time to bring up your case. my husband's not himself. if his face changed as much as his personality has, i wouldn't recognize him. god knows i have done my best to argue for you, and made him angry at me for being so aggressive. you'll just have to be patient for a little while. i'll do what i can, more than i'd do for myself. let that be enough for you.", "is othello angry?", "he just left, clearly upset about something.", "can he even get angry? it's hard to believe. i've seen him stay calm when cannons were blowing his soldiers to bits, even killing his own brother without him batting an eyelid is he really upset? it must be about something important. i'll go talk to him. if he's angry, there must be something seriously wrong.", "please, do so.", "there must be some political news from venice, or some dangerous plot here in cyprus has ruined his good mood. men always get angry about little things when they're really worried about bigger ones. that's the way it goes. when our finger hurts, it makes the rest of the body hurt too. we shouldn't expect men to be perfect, or for them to be as polite as on the weddingday. oh, emilia, i'm so inexperienced that i thought he was being unkind, but actually i was judging him harshly."], ["i hope to god it's something political, like you think, and not jealousy involving you.", "oh no! i never gave him reason to be jealous.", "but jealous people don't think like that. they're never jealous for a reason; they're just jealous. it's like a monster that just grows and grows, out of nothing.", "i hope god keeps that monster from growing in othello's mind!", "amen to that, lady.", "i'll go look for him cassio, stay around here. if he's in a good mood i'll mention you again, and do everything i can.", "i thank you, lady.", "hello, cassio!"], ["why are you so far from home? how are you, my pretty bianca? to tell you the truth, i was just going to your house.", "and i was just going to yours. you've kept away from me for a week? seven days and seven nights? a hundred and sixty-eight hours? and lovers' hours are a hundred and sixty times longer than normal ones! what a tedious wait!", "i'm sorry, bianca. all this time i've been depressed and had problems on my mind. when i get some free time i'll make it up to you. desdemona sweet bianca, would you copy this embroidery pattern for me?", "oh, cassio, where did you get this? this is a gift from another woman, a new lover! now i know why you've been staying away from me. has it come to this? well, well.", "oh, come on, woman. stop jumping to silly conclusions. now you're jealous, thinking that this is from some mistress of mine, but i swear it's not, bianca.", "well, whose is it?", "i don't even know. i found it in my room. it's pretty. someone is certainly looking for it, and i'll have to give it back. so i'd like it copied. take it and do that for me, and leave me alone for a while.", "leave you alone! why?"], ["i'm waiting here for the general, and i don't want him to see me with a woman.", "and why's that?", "it's not because i don't love you.", "but you don't love me. please, just walk with me a little ways, and tell me if i'll see you later tonight.", "i can only walk a little way with you, since i'm waiting here. but i'll see you soon.", "all right, have it your way. i have to make do."], ["do you really think so?", "what do you mean, do i think so?", "what, just because they kissed in private?", "an illicit kiss!", "maybe she was just naked in bed with him for an hour or so, but they didn't do anything.", "naked in bed together, but without doing anything? come on, iago. that would be like playing a trick on the devil: they'd make him think they're going to commit adultery, but then back off. anyone who acted like that would be letting the devil tempt them, and tempting god to condemn them.", "as long as they didn't do anything, it would only be a minor sin. but if i gave my wife a handkerchief", "then what?", "then it's hers. and if it's hers, i guess she can give it to any man she wants.", "her reputation is also her own. can she give that away too?"], ["you can't see a reputation. a lot of people don't even deserve the reputations they have. but a handkerchief", "god, i wish i could forget about the handkerchief! what you told me it haunts me like a nightmare he's got my handkerchief!", "yes, what about it?", "that's not good.", "what if i'd said i saw him do something to hurt you? or heard him say something about it. you know there are jerks out there who have to brag about bedding some woman.", "has he said anything?", "yes, but he'd deny it all.", "what did he say?", "he said he did i don't know.", "he what?", "he was in bed with", "with her?"], ["with her, on top of her however you want to say it.", "in bed with her? on top of her? i would have thought people were telling lies about her rather than believe he was lying on her. my god, it's nauseating! handkerchief confessions handkerchief! i'll kill him first, and then let him confess i'm trembling with rage. i wouldn't be trembling like this if i didn't know deep down this was all true. noses, ears, lips. is it possible? tell me the truth handkerchief damn it!", "keep working, poison! this is the way to trick gullible fools. many good and innocent women are punished for reasons like this. my lord? my lord, othello!", "hey, cassio!", "what's the matter?", "othello's having some kind of epileptic fit. this is his second fit like this. he had one yesterday.", "rub his temples.", "no, don't. this fit has to run its course. if you interrupt it, he'll foam at the mouth and go crazy. look, he's moving. why don't you go away for a bit? he'll get"], ["better right away. when he leaves, it's very important that i talk to you.", "what happened, general? did you hit your head?", "are you making fun of me?", "making fun of you? no, i swear! i wish you could face your bad news like a man!", "a man who's been cheated on isn't a real man. he's subhuman, like an animal.", "in that case there are a lot of animals on the loose in this city.", "did he confess?", "sir, be a man. every married man has been cheated on. millions of men sleep with wives who cheat on them, wrongly believing they belong to them alone. your case is better than that. at least you're not ignorant. the worst thing of all is to kiss your wife thinking she's innocent, when in fact she's a whore. no, i'd rather know the truth. then i'll know exactly what she is, just as i know what i am.", "you're wise! that's for sure.", "go somewhere else for a while. calm down. while you were dazed by grief which isn't appropriate for a man like you cassio showed up here. i got him to leave, and made up an excuse for your trance. i told him to come back and talk to me in a bit, and he promised he would. so hide here and watch how he sneers"], ["at you. i'll make him tell me the whole story again where, how often, how long ago and when he plans to sleep with your wife in the future. i'm telling you, just watch his face. but stay calm, and don't get carried away by rage, or i'll think you're not a man.", "do you hear what i'm saying, iago? i'll be very patient, but do you hear me? i'm not done with him yet", "that's fine, but for now keep your cool. will you go hide?", "now i'll ask cassio about bianca, a prostitute who sells her body for food and clothes. she's crazy about cassio. that's the whore's curse, to seduce many men, but to be seduced by one. whenever he talks about her he can't stop laughing.", "and when he laughs, othello will go crazy. in his ignorant jealousy, he'll totally misunderstand cassio's smiles, gestures, and jokes. how are you, lieutenant?"], ["it doesn't make me feel any better when you call me lieutenant. i'm dying to have that title back again.", "just keep asking desdemona, and it'll be yours. if it was up to bianca to get you your job back, you'd have had it already!", "the poor thing!", "he's laughing already!", "i never knew a woman who loved a man so much.", "the poor thing, i really think she loves me.", "now he denies it a bit, and tries to laugh it off.", "have you heard this, cassio?", "he's asking him to tell the story again. go on, tell it.", "she says you're going to marry her. are you?", "ha, ha, ha!", "are you laughing because you've won? do you think you've won?", "me, marry her? that whore? please give me a little credit! i'm not that stupid. ha, ha, ha!", "so, so, so, so! the winner's always got the last laugh, hasn't he?"], ["i swear, there's a rumor going around that you'll marry her.", "you're kidding!", "if it's not true, you can call me a villain.", "have you given me bastard children to raise? all right, then.", "the little monkey must have started that rumor herself. she thinks i'll marry her because she loves me. she's just flattering herself. i never promised her anything.", "iago is gesturing for me to come closer. now he's telling the story.", "she was here just now. she hangs around me all the time. i was talking to some venetians down by the shore, and the fool showed up. i swear to you, she put her arms around me like this", "saying, \"oh, cassio,\" it seems, judging by his gestures.", "she hangs around me and dangles from my neck and cries, shaking me and pulling at me. ha, ha, ha!", "now he's saying how she took him into our bedroom. oh, i can see your nose now. but i can't see the dog i'm going to throw it to.", "i have to get rid of her.", "look out, here she comes."], ["it's a whore like all the others, stinking of cheap perfume. why are you always hanging around me?", "damn you! what did you mean by giving me this handkerchief? i was an idiot to take it! you want me to copy the embroidery pattern? that was a likely story, that you found it in your room and didn't know who it belonged to. this is a love token from some other slut, and you want me to copy its pattern for you? give it back to her, i won't do anything with it.", "what is it, my dear bianca? what's wrong?", "my god, that's my handkerchief!", "if you want to come have dinner with me, you can. if you don't want to, then good riddance.", "go after her, go.", "actually, i should. she'll scream in the streets if i don't.", "will you be having dinner with her tonight?", "yes, i will.", "well, maybe i'll see you there. i'd really like to speak with you.", "please come. will you?", "don't talk anymore, go after her."], ["how should i murder him, iago?", "did you see how he laughed about sleeping with her?", "oh iago!", "and did you see the handkerchief?", "was it mine?", "it was yours, i swear. and do you see how much your foolish wife means to him? she gave it to him, and he gave it to his whore.", "i wish i could keep killing him for nine years straight. oh, she's a fine woman! a fair woman! a sweet woman!", "no, you have to forget all that now.", "yes, let her die and rot and go to hell tonight. she won't stay alive for long. no, my heart's turned to stone when i hit it, it hurts my hand. oh, the world never saw a sweeter creature. she could be married to an emperor, and he'd be like her slave!", "but that's not how you're going to be.", "damn her, i'm just describing her truthfully! she's so good at sewing, and a wonderful musician. oh, she could sing a wild bear to sleep! oh, she's so witty and creative!", "all the worse that she stooped this low, then."], ["oh, a thousand times worse, a thousand times and what a sweet personality she has!", "yes, a little too sweet.", "yes, that's for sure. oh, it's dreadful, dreadful, iago!", "if you still feel so affectionate toward her, then why not give her permission to cheat on you? if it doesn't bother you, it won't bother anyone else.", "i'll chop her into pieces. how could she cheat on me?", "oh, it's horrible of her.", "and with my own officer!", "that's worse.", "get me some poison tonight, iago. i won't argue with her, so her beautiful body won't disarm me. tonight, iago.", "don't do it with poison. strangle her in her bed, the same bed she's contaminated.", "good, good, i like that it's only fair! very good!", "and let me kill cassio. you'll hear more from me by midnight.", "excellent, good."], ["what's that trumpet for?", "i think someone's coming from venice. it's lodovico. he must be coming from the duke. look, your wife is with him.", "greetings, good general!", "greetings, sir.", "the duke and senators of venice greet you.", "i'll do whatever they order me to do in this letter.", "what's new, cousin lodovico?", "very nice to see you, sir. welcome to cyprus.", "thank you. how is lieutenant cassio?", "well, he's alive.", "cousin, there's been a falling out between him and othello. an unfortunate rift, but you can fix it.", "are you sure of that?", "excuse me?", "\"don't fail to do this, since you'll \""], ["he didn't say anything, he's reading. so there's a rift between othello and cassio?", "yes, unfortunately. i'd do anything to bring them back together, since i really care for cassio.", "damn it all!", "excuse me, my lord?", "are you in your right mind?", "is he angry?", "maybe the letter upset him. i think they want him to go home and appoint cassio governor in his place.", "i'm happy about that.", "oh, are you really!", "my lord?", "i'm glad you're insane enough to admit it in front of me.", "why, sweet othello", "you devil!", "i haven't done anything to deserve this!"], ["my lord, no one will believe this in venice, even though i'd swear i saw it with my own eyes. that was too much. you should apologize. she's crying.", "oh, you devil, you devil! you can cry all day and all night, and i still won't believe you're sad. get out of my sight!", "i wouldn't want to stay here and make you angry.", "she's obedient a fine lady. please, my lord, call her back.", "madam!", "my lord?", "what do you want with her, sir?", "who, me?", "yes, you asked me to call her back. see how well she can turn? she can turn and turn, and then turn on you again. and she can cry, sir oh, how she can cry! and she's obedient, as you say, obedient. very obedient keep crying. concerning this oh, what fake emotion! i am being ordered home get away from me, i'll send for you later. sir, i'll obey the order and return to venice. get away from me, you witch!"], ["cassio can have my job. and tonight, sir, i invite you have dinner with me. welcome to cyprus. horny animals!", "is this the same moor whom the senate considers so capable? is this the guy who's supposed to never get emotional, and who never gets rattled, no matter what disaster happens?", "he's changed a great deal.", "is he sane? is he losing his mind?", "he is what he is. i won't say anything negative about what he might be. if he isn't what he might be, then i wish to god he were!", "hitting his wife?", "it's true, that wasn't such a nice thing to do. but i wish i could say that's the last time he'll do it!", "is it a habit of his? or did the letter make him emotional somehow, and this is the first time he's done it?"], ["oh, it's too bad! it wouldn't be right for me to tell you everything i've seen and heard. you'll see what he's like. his own actions will show you what kind of person he is, so i won't have to bother telling you. just go after him and watch what he does next.", "i'm sorry i was so wrong about him."], ["you haven't seen anything, then?", "no, and i didn't hear anything either, or suspect anything at all.", "but you've seen her and cassio together.", "yes, but i didn't see anything wrong, and i heard every syllable they said.", "didn't they ever whisper?", "never, my lord.", "or ask you to leave the room?", "never.", "not even to get her fan, or her gloves, or her mask, or anything?", "no, my lord.", "that's strange.", "i'd swear to you on my soul that she's a good, honest person, sir. if you suspect otherwise, stop thinking that right now because you're wrong. if any jerk has tried to convince you she's bad, i hope god curses him. if she's not honest, faithful, and true, then there's no such thing as a faithful wife or a happy husband."], ["tell her to come here. go.", "she says all the right things, but the dumbest brothel-keeper would tell the same story. desdemona's a tricky whore with a closet full of awful secrets, but still she'll kneel and pray like an honest woman. i've seen her do it.", "my lord, what do you want?", "please, dear, come here.", "what can i do for you?", "let me see your eyes. look at my face.", "what horrible thing are you imagining?", "emilia go do what you do best, madam. leave us alone for our hanky-panky, and shut the door behind you. if somebody comes, give a shout. that's your , your job. go on, hurry!", "i'm begging you on my knees to tell me what your words mean. i can tell you're furious, but i don't understand what you're saying.", "why? who are you?"], ["i'm your wife, your true and loyal wife.", "go ahead, swear to that, so you'll be damned to hell for lying. otherwise the devils will mistake you for an angel and be too scared to grab you. go ahead, make sure you damn yourself by swearing you've been faithful to me.", "heaven knows i am.", "heaven knows you're as unfaithful as hell.", "unfaithful, my lord? with whom? how am i unfaithful?", "leave me alone, desdemona, go away!", "oh, what a horrible day! why are you crying? because of me? if you've been ordered back to venice because of my father, don't blame me. you may have lost his respect, but so have i.", "if god had decided to treat me like job, making me sick and covered with sores, reducing me to abject poverty, selling me into slavery and destroying all my hopes, i would have found some way to accept it with patience. but instead he's made me a laughingstock for everyone in our time to point at and scorn! even that i could put up with. but instead, my wife, who's supposed to"], ["be like the fountain that my children and all my descendants flow from, has rejected me! worse than that, she's polluted herself, so that the fountain is a place where disgusting toads copulate and reproduce! even the goddess of patience couldn't look at this and be patient it's too horrifying!", "i hope you think i'm faithful to you.", "as faithful as flies in rotting meat, which give birth to maggots every time the wind blows. you're like a weed pretending to be a flower, so beautiful and sweet-smelling that i ache when i look at you. oh, i wish you'd never been born!", "have i done something to offend you without knowing it?", "was someone as beautiful as you meant to be a whore? what have you done? what have you done? oh, you streetwalker! if i said out loud what you've done, you'd burn up with shame. what have you done? heaven has to hold its nose when it sees you! the pure moon in the sky has to shut its eyes when you go by! even the wind that blows over everything on earth is ashamed to visit you. you brazen whore!", "i swear to god you're accusing me wrongly!"], ["so you're saying you're not a whore?", "no, i'm as honest as i am christian. if only letting my husband touch my body means i'm not a whore, i'm not a whore.", "what, you're not a whore?", "no, i swear it.", "is that possible?", "oh, heaven help us!", "i beg your pardon then. i must have the wrong woman. i mistook you for that sly venetian woman who married othello. you whorehouse-keeper.", "you're in charge of this hell! you! we've finished our business. here's some money for you. please lock the door and keep quiet.", "what's he talking about? how are you, madam?", "i'm stunned, to tell you the truth.", "my lady, what's wrong with your husband?"], ["with who?", "why, with your husband, madam. my lord.", "who's your lord?", "my lord is your lord.", "i don't have a lord. don't talk to me, emilia. i can't even cry, though tears are the only answers i could give to all your questions. tonight put my wedding sheets on my bed, and tell your husband to come to me now.", "things have certainly changed!", "it's fair for him to treat me like this, very fair. what have i ever done that he has anything to complain about?", "what can i do for you, madam? how are you?", "i don't know. when grown-ups teach little children, they do it gently and easily. he might have treated me like that, because i'm as unused to abuse as a little child.", "what's the matter, lady?"], ["he called her a whore so many times, and heaped up so much abuse on her that good people can't stand to hear it.", "am i that name, iago?", "what name, madam?", "what my lord said i was.", "he called her a whore. a beggar couldn't have called his slut worse names.", "why did he do that?", "i don't know. i just know i'm not one.", "don't cry, don't cry. what a day this is!", "did she give up all those chances to marry noblemen, give up her father and country and friends, just to be called a whore? doesn't that make you want to cry?", "it's just my bad luck.", "damn him! how did he get such an idea?", "heaven knows.", "i bet my life some evil busybody, some meddling, lying jerk made up this rumor to get some position. i bet my life on it."], ["nobody's that bad. it's impossible.", "if there is, then heaven help him!", "a hangman's noose will help him! let hell chew him up! why should he call her a whore? who's been with her? when has she had the time, the place, or the means to sleep with anyone? how is this at all likely? the moor is being tricked by some crook, some terrible villain, some rotten bastard. oh, i wish we could unmask scoundrels like that, and give a whip to every good man to beat them senseless with!", "keep your voice down.", "oh, to hell with those people! it's the same kind of guy who got you upset and made you suspect i'd cheated on you with the moor.", "you're a fool. shut up.", "oh god, iago, what can i do to win my husband back again? please go to him, my friend. i swear i have no idea why he stopped loving me. here i'm kneeling to swear that if i ever did anything to destroy his love for me, either by thoughts or actions, or if i ever took pleasure in anyone else, or if i never did love him, or don't love him now even though he tries to shake me off"], ["then i hope i have a life of misery! unkindness is powerful, and his unkindness may kill me, but it'll never destroy my love. i can't say \"whore.\" it makes me sick to say the word even now. i wouldn't do the thing that would make me a whore for all the money in the world.", "please calm down. he's just in a bad mood. political business is bothering him, and he's just taking it out on you.", "if only that were all it is", "it is, i promise.", "those trumpets are calling us in to dinner. the venetians are waiting for their food. go in, and don't cry. everything will be all right.", "how are you, roderigo?", "i don't think you're treating me fairly.", "what makes you say that?", "every day you put me off with some trick. instead of finding opportunities for me, you seem to be preventing me from making any progress."], ["well, i won't take it any longer. and i'm not going to sit back and accept what you've done.", "will you listen to me, roderigo?", "i've listened to you too much already. your words and actions don't match up.", "that's not fair.", "it's the truth. i've got no money left. the jewels you took from me to deliver to desdemona would've made even a nun want to sleep with me. you told me she got them, and that she promised to give me a little something in return soon, but nothing like that ever happens.", "well, all right then. fine.", "\"fine!\" he says. \"all right!\" it's not fine, and i'm not all right! it's wrong, and i'm starting to realize i'm being cheated!", "okay.", "it's not okay! i'm going to tell desdemona my feelings. if she returns my jewels, i'll stop pursuing her and apologize to her. if not, i'll challenge you to a duel.", "you've said what you have to say now.", "yes, and i'll do everything i just said."], ["well, all right then. now i see that you have some guts. from this moment on i have a higher opinion of you than before. give me your hand, roderigo. your complaint against me is perfectly understandable, but i still insist i've done everything i could to help you.", "it doesn't look that way to me.", "i admit it doesn't look that way to me, and the fact that you suspect me shows that you're smart. but roderigo, if you're as courageous and determined as i think you are, then wait just a bit longer. if you're not having sex with desdemona tomorrow night, then i suggest you find some way to stab me in the back and kill me.", "well, what's your plan? is it feasible?", "venice has made cassio governor here on cyprus.", "is that true? then desdemona and othello will go back to venice.", "oh, no. he'll go to mauritania and take the beautiful desdemona with him, unless he gets stuck here for some reason. the best way to extend his stay here is to get rid of cassio.", "what do you mean, get rid of him?", "i mean knock his brains out, so he can't take othello's place.", "and that's what you want me to do!"], ["yes, if you want to help yourself. he's having dinner tonight with a prostitute, and i'll go visit him. he doesn't know he's been appointed governor yet. when you see him walking by here (as i'll make sure he does between twelve and one) you can nab him. i'll be nearby to help you, and between the two of us we can handle him. come on, don't stand there in a daze. come along with me. i'll give you such reasons for killing him that you'll feel obliged to snuff him out. it's nearly dinner time, and the night's going to be wasted. let's go!", "i want to hear more about this.", "you will. you'll hear all you want to hear."], ["please, sir, don't trouble yourself.", "i beg your pardon; walking will make me feel better.", "good night, madam. thank you.", "you're most welcome.", "would you walk out with me, sir? oh, desdemona", "yes, my lord?", "go to bed right this minute. i'll be there shortly. send your maid emilia away. make sure you do what i say.", "i will, my lord.", "how are things now? he looks calmer than he did before.", "he says he'll come back right away. he asked me to go to bed and to send you away.", "send me away?", "that's what he said. so give me my nightgown, emilia, and i'll say goodnight. we shouldn't displease him."], ["yes. i wish you'd never met him.", "that's not what i wish. i love him even when he's harsh and mean help me unpin this, would you? i love even his stubbornness, his frowns, his bad moods.", "i put those wedding sheets on your bed, as you asked.", "it doesn't matter. oh, how silly we are! if i die before you do make sure i'm wrapped in those sheets in my coffin.", "listen to you! don't be silly!", "my mother had a maid named barbary. she was in love, and her lover turned out to be wild and left her. she knew an old song called \"willow\" that reminded her of her own story, and she died singing it. i can't get that song out of my head tonight. it's all i can do to keep myself from hanging my head down in despair and singing it like poor barbary. please, hurry up.", "should i get your nightgown?", "no, just help me unpin this. that lodovico is a good-looking man.", "he's very handsome.", "he speaks well.", "i know a lady in venice who'd walk all the way to palestine for a kiss from him."], [", , , . , . , . . . . no, that's not how it goes. who's knocking?", "it's the wind.", ". if i chase more women, you'll sleep with more men okay, go away now. good night. my eyes itch is that an omen i'll be crying soon?", "no, it doesn't mean anything.", "i heard someone say that's what it means. oh, these men, these men! do you honestly think tell me, emilia there are women who'd cheat on their husbands in such a disgusting manner?", "there are women like that out there, no question."], ["would you ever do such a thing for all the world?", "why, wouldn't you?", "by the light of heaven, no, i would not!", "i wouldn't either, by daylight. it would be easier to do it in the dark.", "could you really do such a thing, for all the world?", "the world's huge. it's a big prize for such a small sin.", "i don't think you would.", "actually i think i would, and then i'd undo it after i did it. i wouldn't do it for a nice ring, or fine linen, or pretty gowns or petticoats or hats. but for the whole world? who wouldn't cheat on her husband to make him king? i'd risk my soul for that.", "i'd never do such a bad thing, not for the whole world!", "why, a bad action is just a wrong in this world, but when you've won the whole world, it's a wrong in your own world, so you can make it right then.", "i don't think any woman like that exists.", "yes, a dozen of them as many as there are women in the world, in fact. but i do think it's the husband's fault if we wives cheat on them. for instance, our husbands"], ["may stop sleeping with us, and give it out to other women instead. or they may get insanely jealous, and keep us from going anywhere. or let's say they hit us, or cut back on the money they give us out of spite. we have feelings. we may be able to forgive them, but we want to get back at them too. husbands need to know that their wives are human beings too. they see, smell, and taste sweet and sour just like their husbands. why do they replace us with other women? do they do it for fun? i think they do. is it out of lust? i think so. is it a weakness? it is. and don't we have passions, and a taste for fun, and weaknesses, just like men? then tell them to treat us well. or let them figure out that the bad things we do are just what we learned from them.", "good night, good night. i pray that god will let me learn from women like that not to follow their bad example, but to avoid it!"], ["here, stand behind this wall; he'll come right away. keep your sword out, and then stick it in as far as it'll go. quick, quick. don't be afraid. i'll be right next to you. this will either make us or break us. keep that in mind, and be steady.", "stay right near me. i may mess it up.", "i'm right behind you. be bold, and get ready.", "i don't really want to do this, but he's given me good reasons. i guess it's only one man no big deal. my sword comes out, and he dies.", "i've rubbed this young pimple until he's ready to pop, and now he's angry. whether he kills cassio, or cassio kills him, or they kill each other, it all works in my favor. if roderigo survives, though, he'll ask me for all the gold and jewelry that i stole from him and said i gave to desdemona. i can't let that happen. if cassio survives,he's so handsome and well-spoken that he makes me look ugly. and besides, the moor might tell him about my lies about him. that would be very dangerous for me. no, he's got to die. let it be so. i hear him coming."], ["i know the sound of his walk. die, villain!", "that thrust might really have hurt me if i didn't have this armor on under my cloak. now let's see what you've got on.", "oh, i'm dead!", "i'll be crippled forever! help! murder! murder!", "that's cassio's voice. iago has kept his word.", "oh, what a villain i am!", "that's the truth.", "help me! get some light! get me a surgeon!", "it's him! brave iago, how honest and trustworthy you are! you even went as far as murder to help your friend in his misfortune. you teach me how i should act."], ["whore, your lover's dead now, and you'll be going to hell soon. i'm coming, slut! i've shut the memory of your beautiful eyes out of my heart. you've already stained our sheets with your lust; now i'll stain them with your whore's blood.", "help! isn't there a guard around? no one passing by? murder! murder!", "something's wrong, the man sounds panicked.", "oh, help!", "listen!", "i've acted like such a villain!", "two or three men are groaning. but it's dark out, and it could be a trap. it's not safe to go near them till we get more help.", "nobody's coming? i'll bleed to death.", "look!", "here's someone coming in his pajamas, with a candle and weapons.", "who's there? who's shouting \"murder\"?"], ["we don't know.", "didn't you hear someone shouting?", "i'm here, here! for heaven's sake, help me!", "what's the matter?", "lodovico that's othello's ensign, i think.", "it is. he's a good man.", "cassio who's shouting so loudly?", "is that you, iago? i'm here, i've been destroyed by villains! help me.", "oh, lieutenant! what villains did this to you?", "i think one of them is nearby and can't get away.", "the treacherous criminals! lodovico gratiano who's there? come here and help!", "somebody help me over here!", "that's one of them.", "roderigo murderer! villain!"], ["damned iago! you inhuman dog!", "killing men in the dark? where are these murderers? this is such a quiet, sleepy town! murder, murder! who's that coming? are you good or evil?", "judge for yourself.", "signor lodovico?", "that's me.", "i beg your pardon. cassio's been wounded.", "cassio!", "how are you doing, brother?", "my leg's been cut in two.", "god forbid! bring me some light, gentlemen, i'll bind the wound with my shirt.", "what's the matter? who's shouting?", "who's shouting?", "oh, my dear cassio! my sweet cassio! oh, cassio, cassio, cassio!", "you notorious whore! cassio, do you know who might have stabbed you like this?"], ["no.", "i'm sorry to find you like this. i've been looking all over for you.", "lend me your sash oh, if we only had a stretcher to carry him out of here!", "he's fainted! oh cassio, cassio, cassio!", "sir, i believe this piece of trash, bianca, has something to do with all this trouble. hang in there, cassio. come here, bring the light. do you recognize this face? oh, no, it's my friend and countryman, roderigo. yes, it's roderigo!", "what, roderigo from venice?", "that's the one, sir. do you know him?", "know him? yes.", "signor gratiano, i beg your pardon. i didn't mean to ignore you it's just because of this bloody uproar.", "i'm glad to see you.", "how are you doing, cassio? someone bring me a stretcher!", "roderigo!", "it's him, it's him."], ["good here's the stretcher. get somebody strong to carry him out of here. i'll get the general's surgeon. bianca as for you, ma'am, don't bother. the man lying here was my dear friend, roderigo. what was the problem between you?", "there wasn't any problem. i don't even know him.", "bianca you're pale? get cassio out of here. you look awfully pale, bianca.", "do you see how afraid she is? watch her, we'll get the whole story. keep an eye on her. do you see? the guilty speak volumes even when they're silent.", "what's the matter? what's the matter, husband?", "cassio was attacked here in the dark by roderigo and men who escaped. he's near death, and roderigo's dead already.", "oh, no, good gentleman! oh no, good cassio!", "this is what happens when you visit whores. please, emilia, ask cassio where he was at dinner tonight. bianca what, does that make you nervous?"], ["he ate at my house, but that doesn't make me nervous.", "oh, did he? i order you to come with me.", "go to hell, you whore!", "i'm no whore. i'm as moral as you are.", "as moral as me! damn you!", "gentlemen, let's go make sure cassio's wounds are properly dressed. come on, ma'am, you can tell us another story. emilia, go to the castle and tell othello and desdemona what happened. will you please go now? this is the night that'll either make me or break me."], ["i have to do it, i have to do it. i have to keep my reason in mind. i won't say out loud what my reason is, but i have to do it. but i won't shed any of her blood or scar that beautiful skin, whiter than snow and smooth as the finest marble. but she's got to die, or she'll cheat on other men. put out the light of the candle, and then put out the light of her heart. if i extinguish the candle, i can light it again if i regret it. but once i kill you, you beautiful, fake woman, i do not know the magic that could bring you back. when i've plucked this rose, i can't make it grow again; it will have no choice but to wither and die. let me smell you while you're still on the tree. oh, that sweet breath almost convinces me not to kill you and carry out justice. one more, one more kiss. if you're this beautiful when you're dead, i'll kill you and then love you afterward. one more, and this is the last. such a sweet kiss was never so deadly. i have to cry, but i have to be cruel too. i'm acting like god in the old testament i have to punish the one i love. she's waking up.", "who's there? othello?", "yes, desdemona."], ["will you come to bed, my lord?", "have you said your prayers tonight, desdemona?", "yes, my lord.", "if you can think of any crime you haven't confessed, then pray for forgiveness right away.", "oh, my lord, what do you mean by that?", "well, hurry up and confess. be quick about it. i'll wait over here. i don't want to kill you before you've readied your soul. no, i don't want to send your soul to hell when i kill you.", "you're talking about killing?", "yes, i am.", "then heaven have mercy on me.", "amen to that, from the bottom of my heart.", "if you really feel that way, then i hope you won't kill me.", "hmmph!", "you're scaring me. you terrify me when you have that look in your eyes. i don't know why i should be afraid, since i haven't done anything wrong. but i'm still afraid.", "think of your sins."], ["my only sin was loving you too much.", "yes, that's why you have to die.", "you're wrong to kill me for loving you. why are you chewing on your lower lip like that? you're shaking with emotion. these are bad omens, but i hope, i hope, they don't predict my future.", "quiet. stay still.", "i will. what's this all about?", "you gave that handkerchief, the one i loved and gave to you, to cassio.", "no, i swear by my life and soul! bring him here and ask him.", "my sweet darling, don't lie. you're on your deathbed.", "i am? but i'm not dying yet!", "yes, right now. so confess your sin freely now. even if you swear you're innocent of every accusation, you won't change my mind or remove the thought that's tormenting me. you're going to die.", "then heaven have mercy on me!", "amen to that."], ["and you have mercy on me too! i never did anything wrong to you in my life. i never loved cassio, except with the pure love that i feel for humankind. i never gave him any token of romantic love.", "i saw him holding the handkerchief! you liar, you're turning my heart to stone, and making me call what i'll do murder, when i had been thinking of it as a sacrifice! i saw the handkerchief.", "he found it somewhere, then. i never gave it to him. tell him to come here. he'll tell the truth.", "he's already done so.", "what, my lord?", "that he had sex with you.", "what? had sex with me?", "yes.", "he wouldn't say that.", "no. he won't say anything anymore. honest iago's arranged that.", "oh, i'm scared. what, is he dead?", "if he had as many lives as he's got hairs on his head, i would've killed them all in revenge."], ["oh, he's been betrayed, and i've been ruined.", "what, you whore, are you crying for him right in front of me?", "send me away, my lord, but don't kill me!", ", whore!", "kill me tomorrow but let me live tonight.", "no, if you struggle with me", "just half an hour!", "while i'm doing this, i can't pause for a moment.", "just let me say one prayer!", "it's too late.", "my lord, my lord! hello! my lord, my lord!", "what's that noise? aren't you dead yet? i know i'm cruel, but i'm merciful too. i don't want you to linger in pain.", "hello! my lord, my lord!", "who's there?", "oh my lord, i need to speak to you!"], ["yes, it's emilia. emilia just a minute! she's dead now. emilia's probably come to tell me that cassio's been killed. the fight outside was loud. so! you're not moving anymore? no, you're as still as a grave. should i let her in? is that a good idea? i think she's moving again no. what should i do? if she comes in, she'll try to speak to my wife. my wife, my wife! what wife? i don't have a wife. oh, this is unbearable! oh, the horror! there should be a huge eclipse of the sun and the moon, now that desdemona's no longer on this earth.", "please, my lord. i need to speak with you. oh, my good lord!", "i'd forgotten about you emilia, wait a moment, let me draw the curtains. where are you?", "what's the matter with you now?", "oh, my lord, terrible murders have been committed over there!", "what? just now?", "yes, just now, my lord.", "it's because of the full moon. it comes too close to the earth and drives men crazy.", "cassio's killed a young venetian named roderigo."], ["roderigo's been killed? and cassio's killed?", "no, cassio wasn't killed.", "cassio's not dead? then the wrong man is dead, and sweet revenge has gone wrong.", "oh, i've been murdered unfairly!", "oh lord, who's that crying?", "that? what?", "oh, no, that was my lady's voice.", "help! help! oh, lady, speak again. sweet desdemona! oh sweet mistress, speak!", "i'm dying an innocent woman.", "oh, who did this thing?", "no one. i did it myself. give my love to my kind husband. oh, goodbye!", "why, how could she have been murdered?", "my god, who knows?", "you heard her say it wasn't me."], ["yes, she said that. i must go report what happened.", "she was lying even as she was going down to hell. i did kill her.", "then she was even more an angel, and you're an even blacker devil!", "she cheated on me, and she was a whore.", "you slander her, you devil.", "she was fickle and unfaithful, like water.", "you've lost your mind to accuse her of cheating. she was utterly true to you!", "cassio had sex with her. ask your husband if you doubt me. if i didn't have a good reason to do this, damn me to the very bottom of hell. your husband knew about everything.", "my husband!", "your husband.", "he said she was unfaithful?", "yes, with cassio. if she'd been faithful to me, i never would have given her up, not even if god himself offered me a jewel as big as a planet in exchange for her.", "my husband."], ["yes, he's the one who first told me about her. he's an honest man who detests evil actions.", "my husband?", "why do you keep repeating that, woman? i'm telling you, your husband.", "oh, my mistress, a villain has made a mockery of your love! my husband said she was unfaithful!", "yes, him, woman. i said \"your husband.\" do you understand that word? my friend, your husband, the honest, honest iago.", "if he said that, then i hope his malicious soul rots in hell forever. he's lying through his teeth! she was too attached to her filthy marriage ever to do a thing like that!", "ha!", "go ahead, do your worst. killing me won't send you to heaven. you weren't good enough for her.", "you'd better shut up!", "i can endure far more pain than you could ever give me! oh, you idiot! you stupid fool! as dumb as dirt! you've committed a terrible evil i'm not afraid of your sword. i'll tell everyone what you did, even if it"], ["costs me my life twenty times over. help, help, help! the moor's killed my mistress! murder, murder!", "what's the matter? what's going on here, general?", "oh, are you here, iago? you've done a good job, that other men can attribute their murders to you!", "what's the matter?", "iago tell this villain he's wrong, if you're man enough. he says you told him his wife cheated on him. i know you didn't. you're not that much of a villain. speak, because i'm too emotional to say any more.", "i told him what i thought. i didn't tell him anything that didn't make sense or ring true to him.", "but did you tell him she cheated on him?", "i did.", "then you told a lie, a sick, wicked lie. i swear on my soul it was a lie. you said she slept with cassio. did you say cassio?", "yes, with cassio. now be quiet.", "i will not be quiet! i have to speak. my mistress here lies murdered in her bed", "no, heaven forbid!"], ["and your lies caused this murder.", "don't stand there gaping, everyone. it's true.", "it may be true, but it's unbelievable.", "oh, what a horrible deed!", "evil, evil, evil! i can smell it! i suspected it earlier. i'll kill myself out of grief! oh, evil, evil!", "are you crazy? i'm ordering you, go home.", "good gentlemen, give me permission to speak. i know i ought to obey my husband, but not now. maybe i'll never go home again, iago!", "oh! oh! oh!", "yes, go ahead and moan, because you killed the sweetest, most innocent woman who ever lived!", "she was filthy! i barely knew you, uncle . here's your niece lying here dead. i killed her with these hands. i know this looks horrible.", "poor desdemona! i'm glad your father isn't alive to see this. your marriage made him die of grief before his time. if he was alive now, this sight would hurt"], ["him terribly. it would make him curse the heavens and be damned to hell.", "it's sad, but iago knows she had sex with cassio a thousand times. cassio confessed it, and she pledged her love to him by giving him the handkerchief i'd given her. i saw it in his hand. it was an old memento that my father gave to my mother.", "oh, god! dear god in heaven!", "damn it, shut your mouth.", "no, the truth will come out me, shut my mouth? let heaven and men and devils tell me to shut me up. i'll say what i have to say.", "if you're smart, you'll go home.", "i won't.", "shame on you! drawing your sword on a woman?", "oh, you stupid moor! i found that handkerchief by accident and gave it to my husband. he'd begged me to steal it many times."], ["you evil whore!", "you think she gave it to cassio? no, i found it and gave it to my husband.", "you piece of filth, you're lying!", "i swear i'm not lying. othello oh, you murderous fool! how did you ever get such a good wife?", "won't heaven strike this iago dead? you absolute villain!", "the woman's falling down! he's killed his wife!", "yes, yes! lay me next to my mistress.", "he's gone, and his wife's dead.", "he's a wicked, horrible criminal. take the moor's sword and guard the door from the outside. kill him rather than let him leave this room. i'm going after iago. he's a horrid criminal."], ["i'm not that strong, if a puny nobody can grab my sword. but why should my reputation for honor last longer than my honor did? let it all go.", "what did your song mean, lady? can you hear me? i'll die like a swan. they sing when they die. . moor, she never cheated on you. she loved you, you cruel man. i swear on my soul i'm telling the truth, and as i say this, i die.", "i've got another weapon in the room. it's a spanish sword, hardened in ice cold water and razor sharp. here it is. uncle, i'm coming out!", "if you try that, you'll pay for it. you've got no weapon, so you'll have to suffer.", "look in on me, and talk with me, or i'll attack even without a weapon.", "what's the matter?", "look, i have a weapon, the best sword a soldier could have. i've fought my way through obstacles twenty times more terrifying than you with this weapon. but"], ["who can control his fate? i'm not like that now. don't be afraid, even though you see me with a weapon. this is the end of my journey, the end of my life. are you backing away in fear? there's no reason to be afraid. you could tap me with a feather and i'd back away. where would othello go? oh, look at you! such cruel luck! you're as pale as your nightgown! when we meet on judgment day, that look of yours will send me from heaven to hell, where devils will grab me. you're cold, cold, and you were never hot with lust. oh you damned villain! whip me, you devils, so i don't have to look at this heavenly sight! blow on me with hot winds, roast me in lava, drown me in liquid fire! oh, desdemona! dead desdemona! oh, oh!", "where is that poor rash man?", "you mean the man who used to be othello? here i am.", "where's that snake? bring the villain forward."], ["i'm looking to see if you have cloven hooves like the devil. but that's just a fairy tale. if you are a devil, i won't be able to kill you.", "take his sword away from him.", "i'm bleeding, but you didn't kill me.", "i'm not sorry, either. i want you to live, since to me, death is happiness.", "oh othello, you were once so good, then you were tricked by this villain. what can i say to you?", "say anything. call me an honorable murderer if you like. i did nothing out of hate, only out of honor.", "this poor guy's partly confessed his plan. did you plan cassio's death with him?", "yes.", "dear general, i never gave you any reason to hate me.", "i believe you, and i ask you to forgive me. will you please make this half-devil say why he tricked me and damned my soul?"], ["don't ask me anything. you know what you know. from this moment on, i'll never say another word.", "what, not even to pray?", "torture will make you talk.", "well, do your best.", "sir, you'll understand everything that has happened. i don't think you know now. here is a letter we found in roderigo's pocket. and here's another. this one talks about how roderigo should kill cassio.", "oh, you villain!", "ungodly and monstrous!", "here's another letter from his pocket, addressed to iago and full of complaints. we think he was going to send it to iago, but then iago stepped in and answered his complaints by killing him.", "oh, you wicked scoundrel! cassio, how did you get my wife's handkerchief?", "i found it in my room, and iago just confessed that he put it there for his own purposes."], ["oh, what a fool i am!", "also, in his letter to iago, roderigo criticizes iago for telling him to get me angry while i was on guard duty, and get me demoted. and just now he admitted it, even though he'd seemed to be dead for a long while iago tricked him, iago urged him to do it.", "othello you'll have to leave this room and come with us. you're stripped of your power and your command, and cassio will govern cyprus. as for this slave, iago, if we can think of any torture that will hurt him a lot but keep him alive a long time, he'll have it. you'll remain a prisoner until we bring your crimes to the venetian government. okay, take him away.", "wait. a word or two before you go. i've given the state of venice a bit of help in the past, and they know it. but enough about that. when you record these sad events in your letters, please describe me exactly as i am. don't tone things down or exaggerate them out of hostility. if you're being fair, you'll have to describe me as someone who loved too much, but who wasn't wise about it. i was not easily made jealous, but once i was tricked and manipulated, i worked myself into a frenzy. describe me as a fool who threw away a precious pearl with his own hands, like a silly indian who didn't know what it was worth. as someone who was not emotional, but who then cried a lot. write all this"], ["down, and then say also that in aleppo i once saw a turk beating a venetian, so i grabbed the turk by the throat and hit him like this.", "oh, what a bloody end to all this!", "everything we've heard is bad.", "desdemona i kissed you before i killed you. now, killing myself, i'm dying while i kiss you again.", "i was afraid this would happen, because he was a noble, brave man, but i didn't think he had a weapon.", "iago you bloodthirsty dog, you're crueler than sadness or hunger, crueler than the sea. look at these dead people on this bed. you did all this. he makes me sick. take him away. gratiano, take care of the house, and take the moor's property. you've inherited everything. cassio governor, i leave it in your hands to punish this evil villain: just decide the time, the place and the means of torture. and then carry it out! i have to go back to venice, and tell them about these sad events."]], [["now all of my family's troubles have come to a glorious end, thanks to my brother, king edward iv. all the clouds that threatened the york family have vanished and turned to sunshine. now we wear the wreaths of victory on our heads. we've taken off our armor and weapons and hung them up as decorations. instead of hearing trumpets call us to battle, we dance at parties. we get to wear easy smiles on our faces rather than the grim expressions of war. instead of charging toward our enemies on armored horses, we dance for our ladies in their chambers, accompanied by sexy songs on the lute. but i'm not made to be a seducer, or to make faces at myself in the mirror. i was badly made and don't have the looks to strut my stuff in front of pretty sluts. i've been cheated of a nice body and face, or even normal proportions. i am deformed, spit out from my mother's womb prematurely and so badly formed that dogs bark at me as i limp by them. i'm left with nothing to do in this weak, idle peacetime, unless i want to look at my lumpy shadow in the sun and sing about ."], ["since i can't amuse myself by being a lover, i've decided to become a villain. i've set dangerous plans in motion, using lies, drunken prophecies, and stories about dreams to set my brother clarence and the king against each other. if king edward is as honest and fair-minded as i am deceitful and cruel, then clarence is going to be locked away in prison today because of a prophecy that will murder edward's children. oh, time to hide what i'm thinking here comes clarence.", "good afternoon, brother. why are you surrounded by these armed guards?", "his majesty is so concerned about my personal safety that he has ordered them to conduct me to the .", "you're being arrested? why?", "because my name is george.", "that's not your fault! he should imprison the person who named you, instead. maybe the king is sending you to the tower to have you renamed. but, really, what's going on, clarence? can you tell me?"], ["i'll tell you as soon as i know, richard, because at this point i have no idea. all i've been able to find out is that our brother the king has been listening to prophecies and dreams. he picked out the letter \"g\" from the alphabet and said a wizard told him that \"g\" will take the throne away from his children. he thinks \"g\" is me. i've learned that this, along with other frivolous reasons like it, is what prompted the king to send me to prison.", "well, this is what happens when men let themselves be ruled by women. the king isn't the one sending you to the tower, clarence. it's his wife, lady grey, who got him to do this. remember how she and her brother, anthony woodeville, made him send lord hastings to the tower? hastings was just released. we're not safe, clarence, we're not safe.", "by god, i think the only people who safe are the queen's own relatives and the late-night messengers the king uses to fetch his mistress, mistress shore. did you hear how lord hastings had to beg the queen to be freed?", "hastings got his freedom by bowing down to that goddess. and i'll tell you what. if we want to stay in the king's good graces, we're going have to act like the servants, too. ever since our brother made them gentlewomen, mistress shore and the queen have become mighty busybodies in our kingdom."], ["i beg your pardon, my lords, but the king gave me orders that no one, however high in rank, should speak privately to clarence.", "all right. if you like, brakenbury, you can listen to anything we say. we're not saying anything treasonous, man. we say the king is wise and good, and his noble queen is getting old, pretty, and not jealous. and that mr. shore's wife has nice feet, cherry lips, pretty eyes, and a very pleasant way of expressing herself. and, finally, that the queen's relatives have all been elevated in rank. what do you think? is there anything inaccurate in that?", "i have nothing to do with what you're talking about, my lord.", "\"nothing to do\" with mrs. shore! i tell you, mister, there's only one man who gets to do with her and not be punished for it. everyone else had better keep their \"nothings\" to themselves.", "who is that, my lord?", "her husband, you rascal. are you going to get me in trouble?", "i beg your to pardon me, and now please stop talking to clarence."], ["we know you have a job to do, brakenbury, and we'll do what you say.", "we are required to serve the queen, and we must obey her. farewell, brother. i will go to the king and do whatever you want me to, even if it's to call my brother's wife \"sister,\" in order to set you free. but just so you know, i am very angry about how our own brother has treated you, angrier than you can imagine.", "it doesn't make either of us happy, i know.", "well, your imprisonment won't last long. i will either get you out, lying if i have to, or stay in prison in your place. in the meantime, be patient.", "i have no choice. goodbye.", "go walk the path that you will never return from. dumb, honest clarence. i love you so much that i'll send your soul to heaven very soon if heaven will accept anything from me, that is. but who's coming? the newly released hastings?", "good afternoon, my dear lord!", "the same to you, my lord! welcome to the open air again. how did you tolerate prison?"], ["with patience, noble lord, as prisoners must. but i will live to thank those who sent me there.", "no doubt, no doubt. and so will clarence, for your enemies are his enemies, and they have gotten the upper hand of him as well as of you.", "it's a shame that we eagles are caged up while the vultures are free to do whatever they please.", "what's the news abroad?", "no news as bad as the news at home: the king is sickly, weak, and depressed, and his doctors are very afraid he's going to die", "now, by george, that really is terrible news. oh, the king has abused his body with bad habits for a long time, and it's finally taking its toll on him. very sad. where is he, in his bed?", "he is.", "you go ahead, and i will follow you."], ["the king won't live, i hope. but he'd better not die till clarence is sent packing to heaven. i'll go see the king and, with carefully argued lies, get him to hate clarence even more than he already does. if my plan succeeds, clarence doesn't have another day to live. then god's free to send king edward to heaven, too, and leave me the world to run around in! i'll marry the earl of warwick's youngest daughter, lady anne. so what if i killed her husband and her father? the best way to make up for the girl's losses is to become what she's lost: a husband and a father. so that's what i'll do, not because i love her but because i'll get something out of it. but i'm running ahead of myself. clarence is still alive; edward is not only alive, he's king. only when they're dead can i start to count my gains."], ["set down your honorable load, men, if there is ever any honor in being dead. i want to mourn the cruel death of this good man. look at the noble king's poor cold body the measly remains of the lancaster family.", "his royal blood has drained right out of him. i hope i can talk to your ghost, henry, without breaking church laws. i want you to hear my sorrow. my was murdered by the same man who stabbed you. my tears now fall into the holes where your life leaked out. i curse the man who made these holes. i curse the man's heart who had the heart to stab you. and i curse the man's blood who shed your blood. i want the man who made me suffer by killing you to face a more terrible end than i could wish on spiders, toads, and all the poisonous, venomous things things alive. if he ever has a child, let it be born prematurely, and let it look like a monster so ugly and unnatural that the sight of it frightens its own mother."], ["and if he ever has a wife, let her be more miserable when he dies than i am now. guards, let's continue on to chertsey monastery, carrying this holy burden you picked up at st. paul's monastery.", "when it gets too heavy, rest, and i'll lament over king henry's corpse some more.", "halt, corpse bearers, and put down your load.", "what wicked magician has conjured up this devil to interrupt this sacred burial rite?", "villains, set down the corpse, or i'll make a corpse of .", "my lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.", "rude dog! stop when i command you to! and put up your weapon so it's not pointing at my chest, or i'll strike you to the ground and trample on you, you beggar, for being so bold."], ["what, are you trembling? you're all afraid of him? well, i can't blame you. you're only human, after all, and mortals can't stand to look at the devil. richard) begone, you dreadful servant of hell. you only had power over my father-in-law's body; you can't have his soul. so get out.", "sweet saint, for goodness's sake, don't be so angry.", "ugly devil, for god's sake, get out of here and leave us alone. you have made the happy world into your hell, filling it with cursing cries and lamentations. if you enjoy looking at your awful deeds, take a look at this noteworthy example of your butcheries.", "oh, gentlemen, look, look! dead henry's wounds have opened up and are bleeding again! shame on you, you deformed lump. it's your presence that draws out this blood from his empty veins. your inhuman and unnatural actions have provoked this unnatural flood of blood. oh god, who made this blood, revenge his death! oh earth, which soaks up this blood, revenge his death! either let heaven send lightning to strike the murderer dead or let the earth open wide and devour him, as it does this good king's blood."], ["dear woman, you don't know the rules of charity. when faced with bad, you're supposed to turn it into good, and when subject to curses, you're supposed to convert them into blessings.", "villain, you don't know the laws of god or of man. even the fiercest wild animal has some touch of pity.", "if i know nothing about pity, that must mean i'm not an animal.", "it's amazing to hear a devil speak the truth!", "it's even stranger when an angel is so angry. divine, perfect woman, give me a chance to prove in detail that i'm innocent of the evils you accuse me of.", "contagious infection of humanity, give me a chance to condemn you for the evils i know you've committed.", "you who are beautiful beyond words, calm down and let me explain myself.", "you who are wicked beyond belief, the only \"explanation\" i'll accept from you is for you to hang yourself.", "such an expression of despair would only prove that i was guilty.", "maybe, but if you killed yourself, it would also show that you felt some guilt for killing others."], ["let's say i didn't kill them.", "then you might as well say they're not dead. but they are dead, and you killed them, you slave of the devil.", "i did not kill your husband.", "well, then he must be alive.", "no, he is dead. edward killed him.", "you're lying. queen margaret saw your sword steaming with his blood. it was the same sword you almost killed her with and you would have killed her if my brothers hadn't fought you off.", "she provoked me with her lying mouth, accusing me of crimes i didn't commit.", "no, what provoked you was your own bloody mind, which never thinks about anything but butchering. you killed this king, didn't you?", "yes, i'll grant you that.", "you'll grant me, you hedgehog? then let god grant me that you'll be damned for that wicked deed. oh, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.", "that will please god, who has him now.", "he is in heaven, where you will never go.", "let him thank me, who helped him get there. he's better suited to be there than here."], ["and you're not suited for any place except hell.", "yes, and one other place, if you'll only let me name it.", "some dungeon.", "your bedroom.", "there is no rest to be had in any bedroom where you are!", "exactly, madam, until i sleep with you.", "i you're right.", "i know i am. but, gentle lady anne, let's stop this rapid-fire argument and move more slowly. isn't the person who caused the untimely deaths of these two , henry and edward, as much to blame as the person who actually executed the murders?"], ["you're both those people responsible for both cause and effect.", "your beauty caused what i did. it haunted me in my sleep. i would have killed the whole world just to be able spend one hour next to you.", "if i believed you, murderer, i would take my nails and scratch that beauty right off my cheeks.", "i couldn't stand to see you destroy your beauty; you won't touch it as long as i'm standing next to you. just as everyone becomes cheerful from the sun, i'm cheered up by your looks. they are my daylight, my life.", "then i hope night shadows your day, and death takes your life!", "don't damn yourself. you, fair lady, are both my day and my life.", "i wish i were, so i could deprive you of both day and life.", "it's strange that you want to take revenge on the person who loves you.", "it's just and reasonable that i want to take revenge on the person who killed my husband.", "the man who killed your husband, dear lady, only did it to help you get a better husband.", "there is no better one on earth."], ["wrong. there is a man who loves you better than your husband could.", "name him.", "plantagenet.", "yes, that's my husband's name.", "someone else has the same name, but he's a better man.", "where is this man?", "here.", "why do you spit at me?", "if only i could spit poison.", "poison never came from such a sweet place.", "poison never landed on such an ugly toad. get out of my sight! you're poisoning my eyes.", "your beautiful eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine with love.", "i wish my eyes were , so they could strike you dead!"], ["i wish they were, so that i could die right now, because, at this point, i live a living death. your eyes have made me cry, shamefully, like a child. i never cried before this. i didn't cry when my father, york, and my brother edward both wept at the death of my brother rutland, whom clifford slaughtered. and when your warrior-father recounted the sad story of my father's death, pausing to sob twenty times in the course of the story so that all the bystanders ended up dripping tears like trees in a rainstorm even then, i refused to cry. but your beauty has made me cry until i couldn't see. i never tried to win over a friend or enemy with sweet words. i'm too proud for that. but if your beauty is the reward for sweet talk, i'll talk.", "don't curl your lips in scorn. they were made for kissing, not for contempt. if your vengeful heart can't forgive me, here take my sword and bury it in my heart so that my soul, which adores you, can be free. i open myself to being stabbed. in fact, i beg for death on my knees.", "no, don't pause, because i kill king henry, though it was your beauty that made me do it. go ahead. and it me who stabbed young edward, though it was your heavenly face that set me to work."], ["take up the sword again, or take me up.", "get up, liar. though i wish you were dead, i'm not going to be the one to kill you.", "then tell me to kill myself, and i will.", "i have already.", "you said it when you were furious. say it again just one word, and my hand, which killed your lover out of love, will kill your far truer lover. you will be an accessory to both crimes.", "i wish i knew what was in your heart.", "i've told you.", "i fear that your words and your heart are both false.", "then no man has ever been honest.", "well, then, put your sword away.", "tell me that you'll accept my love.", "you'll know about that later."], ["but can i have some hope?", "i'd like to think all men have some hope.", "please wear this ring.", "i'll take the ring, but don't assume i'm giving you anything in return.", "see how my ring encircles your finger? that's how your heart embraces my poor heart. wear both the ring and my heart, because both are yours. and if i, your poor devoted servant, may ask you for one small favor, you will guarantee my happiness forever.", "what's that?", "please leave it to me to take care of the burial, as i have more reason to mourn than you do. meanwhile go to my estate at crosby place. after i have performed the solemn burial rites for this noble king at chertsey monastery and cried with regret at his grave, i'll hurry to meet you. for various reasons that must remain secret, please do this for me.", "i'll do it with all my heart. i'm happy to see you've come to repent for what you've done. tressel and berkeley, come with me.", "say goodbye to me."], ["it's more than you deserve. but since you're already teaching me how to flatter you, pretend i've said goodbye already.", "sirs, take up the corpse.", "toward chertsey, noble lord?", "no, to the whitefriars monastery. wait for me there.", "has anyone ever courted a woman in this state of mind? and has anyone ever won her, as i've done? i'll get her, but i won't keep her long. what! i, who killed her husband and his father, managed to win her over when her hatred for me was strongest, while she's swearing her head off, sobbing her eyes out, and the bloody corpse, proof of why she should hate me, right in front of her? she has god, her conscience, and my own acts against me, and i have nothing on my side but the ugly devil and my false looks. and yet, against all odds, i win her over! ha! has she already forgotten her brave husband, prince edward, whom i stabbed on the battlefield three months ago in my anger? the world will never again produce such a sweet, lovely gentleman. he was graced with lots of natural gifts, he was young, valiant, wise, and no doubt meant to be king."], ["and yet she cheapens herself by turning her gaze on me, who cut her sweet prince's life short and made her a widow? on me, though i am barely half the man that edward was? on me, though i am limping and deformed? i bet i've been wrong about myself all this time. even though i don't see it, this lady thinks i'm a marvelously good-looking man. time to buy myself a mirror and employ a few dozen tailors to dress me up in the current fashions. since i'm suddenly all the rage, it will be worth the cost. but first, i'll dump this fellow in his grave, then return to my love weeping with grief. come out, beautiful sun until i've bought a mirror to admire my reflection in, i'll watch my shadow as i stroll along."], ["be patient, madam. i'm sure his majesty will recover his health soon.", "you'll only make him worse with all your worry. for god's sake, let people comfort you. then you'll be able to cheer up.", "if he were dead, what would happen to me?", "nothing more than that you'd lose your husband.", "losing husband will cause me all sorts of harm.", "you have been blessed with an excellent son, who will comfort you when the king is dead.", "but he's young, and as long as he's too young to become king, richard, the duke of gloucester, has power over him. richard loves neither me nor any of you.", "has it been decided that richard will be ?", "it's been decided, though not yet officially announced. but that's what will happen if the king dies."], ["here come lord buckingham and lord derby.", "queen elizabeth good afternoon, your royal highness!", "i hope god makes you happy again, like you once were.", "my good lord derby, the countess richmond would hardly say to your kind words. but don't worry. i don't hold it against , even though she's your wife, that she's so unfriendly and arrogant.", "please don't believe the false rumors you've heard about her feelings toward you, or if they're true, then forgive her, since she's only acting that way because she's sick, not because she hates you.", "did you see the king today, lord derby?", "yes, the duke of buckingham and i have just returned from visiting him.", "what are the chances of his getting better, lords?", "madam, keep up hope. he seems cheerful."], ["god give him health. did you talk with him?", "yes, madam. he wants to patch things up between richard and your brothers, and between your brothers and hastings. he has summoned them all.", "i wish i could believe you that all was well! but i'm worried that things can only go downhill from here.", "they're out to get me, and i won't stand for it! which of you has been complaining to the king that i don't like them? by god, whoever is worrying the king with these lies doesn't love him very much. just because i don't know how to flatter and act nice, to smile in men's faces and, as soon as their backs are turned, spread rumors about them, to bow and scrape like a nobleman trained in the french court, people have to think i'm their enemy. can't a plain man live and do no harm to anyone without being taken advantage of by a bunch of slick, sneaky lowlifes?", "which of us are you referring to?", "you, who are neither honest nor good. when did i ever do you any harm? or you? or you? or any of you? damn you all! the king whom i hope god will protect better than you would like can't get a minute's rest without you bothering him with your outrageous complaints."], ["brother, you've made a mistake. the king himself noticed your hatred toward my children, my brothers, and myself. no one had to point it out to him it's obvious. he people to visit him. he wanted to find out the reason for your ill will, so he could do something about it.", "i can't tell what's going on. the world has become so bad that now little wrens have settled where eagles used to roost. since every peasant has been made into a nobleman, many noblemen have been dragged down to the level of peasants.", "come, come, i know what you're referring to, richard. you resent my friends' rise in society, and my own. let's hope we never need your help for anything.", "meanwhile, we're the ones who need you. my brother is imprisoned because of you, i am disgraced, and the nobility are held in contempt while those who two days ago weren't worth a dime have suddenly been promoted.", "by the lord who raised me to this weighty post from the happy and carefree life i used to enjoy, i promise you i never did anything to get the king to turn against the duke of clarence. in fact, i've always been on his side and have pleaded for him. my lord, you're doing me a huge injustice to suggest otherwise."], ["oh, and i'll bet you'll also deny you were responsible for lord hastings's recent stay in prison.", "she may deny that, my lord, because", "she may, lord rivers? everybody knows she . she may do a lot more than that, sir. she may help you to get many nice promotions, and then deny she helped you, claiming you won them on your own merits. what can't she do? she could even", "she could even what?", "she could even what? she could marry a king, a bachelor, a handsome young lad. certainly, your grandmother had a worse match.", "my lord of gloucester, i have suffered your blunt upbraidings and your bitterness toward me for too long. by god, i will tell the king about these taunts. i would rather be a country serving maid than a great queen if it meant i could escape your scorn and constant harassment.", "i've had very little joy as england's queen.", "god, give her even less joy, i beg you! elizabeth, your honor, your high rank, and your position as are all owed to me."], ["queen elizabeth what! you're threatening to tell the king? go ahead, and don't spare a single detail. look, what i have said to you i will repeat in the presence of the king. if it means i'll be sent to the tower, so be it. it's time for me to speak the truth. all the pains i took on king edward's behalf have been forgotten.", "you devil! i remember these pains all too well. you killed my husband, henry, in the tower and my poor son, edward, at tewksbury.", "queen elizabeth before you were queen in fact, before your husband was king i was a packhorse for his great affairs, a weeder-out of his proud enemies, a generous rewarder of his friends. in order to make his blood royal, i spent my own blood.", "yes, and you spent blood than his or your own.", "queen elizabeth in all that time, you and your first husband, sir john grey, were fighting for the lancasters. and so were you, rivers. elizabeth, wasn't your first husband killed while fighting in queen margaret's army at saint alban's? in case you've forgotten, i want to remind you where you come from and what side you were on before you arrived here. and i want you to remember whom i fought for, who i have been, and who i am.", "you were a murderous villain, and you still are."], ["elizabeth poor abandoned his father-in-law, a lancaster, and broke his own oath may jesus forgive him!", "may god take revenge on him!", "queen elizabeth in order to fight on edward's side to help him win the crown. and now he is rewarded by being thrown in prison! i wish to god my heart were made of stone, like edward's is. or i wish edward's were soft and full of feeling, as mine is, so that he would let clarence go. i am too childish, too innocent, for this world.", "hurry to hell, then, and leave the world alone, you demon! hell is where your kingdom is.", "my lord of gloucester, in those busy days, which you're bringing up now to prove we're your enemies, we followed the lawful king. if you were king, we would do the same.", "if i were king? i'd rather be a peddler. the thought of being king doesn't appeal to me in the least.", "you're right to imagine that being this country's leader brings no pleasure. as queen, i have felt none."], ["no pleasure for the queen, indeed: i am the real queen, and the experience is completely joyless. i can no longer hold my tongue.", "hear me, you wrangling pirates. you're quarreling over what doesn't even belong to you you stole it from me! which of you does not tremble when you see me? if you aren't trembling because you know i am queen and you are my subjects, then you're shaking because you threw me from the throne! richard oh highborn villain, do not turn away!", "ugly, wrinkled witch, what are you doing here?", "only describing what you have ruined. or at least that's what i plan to do before i let you go.", "weren't you banished on pain of death?", "i was. but i felt more pain from exile than i would have from being dead here at home. you, richard, owe me a husband and a son. the rest of you owe me a kingdom. and all of you owe me allegiance. the sorrow that i feel actually belongs to you, and the high life you enjoy actually belongs to me. you stole it from me.", "the curse my noble laid on you when you set a paper crown on his head just before slaying him has finally borne fruit. your scorn for him was so shocking that he cried rivers. to stop up his tears, you handed him a rag soaked with the blood of his own child. god, not us, is responsible for punishing you for your bloody deed."], ["god is just. he rewards the innocent.", "oh, killing that child was the dirtiest, most merciless deed there ever was!", "tyrants themselves wept when they heard about it.", "everyone understood there would be a heavy payback.", "even wept to see it.", "what, were you all snarling before i arrived, ready to catch each other by the throat like dogs, but now that i'm here, you turn your hatred toward me? did the duke of york's terrible curse have so much weight with god that god repaid him not only with henry's death and my lovely edward's death but with the loss of their kingdom and with my banishment, too? all because of what happened to that brat rutland? if curses can pierce the clouds and enter heaven that easily, then open up, thick clouds, and listen to curses!"], ["queen elizabeth though your king did not die in battle, let him die from overindulging his appetites, as my husband was murdered to make your husband king. may your son edward, who is currently the prince of wales, die young and violently, as payback for the death of my son edward, the former prince of wales. and may you outlive your glory just as miserably as i have, to make up for taking position as queen. may you live long enough to mourn your children's deaths and watch another woman enjoy the throne, as i now watch you. let your happy days die long before you do. after many extended hours of grief, may you die neither a mother, a wife, nor england's queen. rivers, dorset, and lord hastings, you all stood by as my son was stabbed. for his sake, i pray to god that none of you die a natural death but have your lives cut short by some unforeseen accident.", "enough of your magic spells, you hateful, withered hag.", "and leave you out? don't move, dog. it's your turn now. if heaven has any plagues beyond what i can drum up, let it wait until your are piled high and then hurl them down on you, you destroyer of a whole world of peace! may conscience eat away at your soul constantly. may you suspect your true friends of being traitors and take the worst traitors as your closest friends. may you never sleep a wink except to dream of a hell full of ugly devils."], ["you deformed, prematurely born, rooting hog, you evil birth defect, you insult to your mother's womb, you hated disgrace to your father's sperm, you disgusting", "margaret.", "richard.", "yes?", "i didn't call you.", "i beg your pardon i thought it was me whom you were calling all those terrible names.", "yes, i was, but i don't want an answer from you. let me finish my curse.", "i've finished it for you, and it ends in \"margaret.\"", "he's turned your curse against you, margaret.", "poor imitation queen, why do you align yourself with this humpbacked spider when he's got you trapped in his deadly web? fool! you're sharpening a knife to cut yourself. the day will come when you'll wish i could help you cast spells against this poisonous, hunchbacked toad.", "woman, stop your frantic curses and false prophesies before we run out of patience and do something bad to you."], ["shame on you; i've already run out of patience with you all.", "if you got what you deserved, you would learn some respect.", "what i deserve is that you treat me like a queen, and what you deserve is to act like my subjects. give me what i deserve, and do your duty!", "rivers don't argue with her. she's crazy.", "enough from you, mister, you're being impertinent. unlike those born into nobility, your claim to royalty is so recent that you hardly even know what it means to lose it. people in high positions are shaken by many blasts of wind, and when they fall, they shatter into pieces.", "good advice, indeed. take it to heart, dorset.", "it applies to you as much as to me, my lord.", "yes, and much more so. but i was born that high. like an eagle, which builds its nest at the top of a high tree, i play in the wind and am not afraid to look at the sun.", "but you turn that sun into a shadow. take my son, for example. he is dead now. you put out his bright life forever. you are building your nest in nest. oh god who's watching, don't let him get away with this! he won his position violently. let him lose it that way, too."], ["stop if you can't be kind, at least have some shame.", "how dare you talk about kindness or shame. you have only been unkind to me, and you have shamefully butchered my hopes. my kindness to you is to be outraged at what has happened, and my sad, sad shame is in what you have done to my life.", "enough, enough.", "oh noble buckingham, i'll kiss your hand to show my friendship and support for you. i wish only good things upon you and your noble family! your clothes aren't spattered with my family's blood, and you aren't affected by my curse.", "no one here is affected by your curse, because curses are just words with no power.", "i think they rise up to heaven and arouse god from his gentle sleep. buckingham oh buckingham, watch out for that dog, richard! when he seems to be fawning on you, he's actually about to bite. and his poisonous bite kills. have nothing to do with him. beware of him. all the powers of sin, death, and hell are doing his bidding.", "what is she saying, my lord?", "nothing that interests me, my good lord."], ["what, you ignore my kind advice and try to please the devil i'm warning you about? oh, just remember this another day, when he splits your heart in two with sorrow. then you'll say poor margaret was a prophet. richard will come to hate everyone here, as you will come to hate him and as god will come to hate you all.", "her curses have made my hair stand on end.", "mine, too. i don't understand why she's not locked up.", "i can't blame her. she has been wronged too often. i regret what i have done to hurt her.", "i never caused her any harm, as far as i know.", "but you have all the advantages from the harm done. for my part, i was too eager to do king edward good. he doesn't even seem to notice now. and look how he's repaid poor clarence for his loyalty penned him up like a pig being fattened for slaughter. god pardon those who are responsible for clarence's troubles.", "that's very virtuous and christian of you, richard, to pray for those who have done us harm.", "i always pray for them because \"they\" are none other than myself. if i cursed clarence's wrongdoers, i'd be cursing myself."], ["madam, his majesty asks for you, and for you, duke of gloucester, and for you, my noble lords.", "catesby, we'll be there soon. lords, will you come with me?", "we will wait on you, your majesty.", "incredible. i do the wrong and am the first to start quarrels. what i did in secret i blame on others. i cry about clarence, whom i had imprisoned, in front of these simple fools namely, hastings, derby and buckingham and tell them that the queen and her allies roused the king against my brother clarence. they believe me and urge me to take revenge on rivers, vaughan, and grey. but then i sigh and quote a chunk of the bible how god says do good in return for evil. ha! dressing my out-and-out wickedness in scraps of scripture, i look like a saint exactly when i'm most like the devil.", "but quiet. here come the murderers i've hired. how's it going, hardy, reliable friends! are you going to take care of this thing now?", "we are, my lord. we've come to get the warrant so we can be let into his cell."], ["good thinking. i have it on me here. when you're done, go to crosby place. but, sirs, do the job fast. and stick to your mission. don't let him plead for his life, because clarence is a good talker and may make you pity him if you let him get started.", "tut, tut, my lord, we're not going to stand around chit-chatting. talkers aren't good doers. rest assured that we're going there to use our hands, not our tongues.", "when fools cry, you remain stony. i like you guys. go straight to work. hurry now, get the job done.", "we will, my noble lord."], ["why do you look so depressed today, your grace?", "oh, i had a miserable night. i had such dark and terrifying dreams that i swear i wouldn't spend another night like that if it guaranteed me a whole lifetime of happy days.", "what was your dream? tell me.", "i thought i had escaped from the tower and was on a ship to france with my brother richard, who persuaded me to leave my cabin and walk on deck with him. looking toward england, we reminisced about the countless frightening experiences we'd had in the wars between the yorks and the lancasters. as we were pacing the deck, which was tipping heavily, richard seemed to stumble, and as i tried to grab hold of him and keep him from falling, he knocked me overboard into the crashing waves. lord, how painful it was to drown. the sound of the rushing water was terrible, and so were the sights. i saw a thousand shipwrecks, a thousand men whom fish had gnawed to the bone, huge anchors, chunks of gold, heaps of pearls, and precious jewels all scattered on the bottom of the sea."], ["some of the gems had wedged themselves like imitation eyes into the dead men's skulls. the fake eyes gazed dully at the bones scattered around.", "so you had time as you were dying to look around?", "i thought i did, and i often tried to die. but the terrible water always held me back. it wouldn't let my soul find its way to air but smothered it inside my gasping body. my body wanted so badly to vomit up my spirit that it almost burst.", "and didn't you wake up during this terrible agony?", "oh, no, my dream went on even after i died. in fact, the real nightmare had only just begun. with the help of the grim that poets like to write about, my soul crossed the river into the kingdom of endless night. the first to greet me there was my great , the famous earl of warwick. he cried aloud, \"what terrible punishment can this dark realm devise for the oath-breaker clarence?\" and he vanished. then a ghost like an angel with its hair spattered in blood wandered by, and shieked,"], ["\"clarence has arrived lying, cowardly , who stabbed me at tewksbury. grab him, avenging spirits, and torment him.\" with that, a legion of ugly demons surrounded me and howled so loudly in my ears that i woke up trembling and for a long time thought i was still in hell.", "i'm not surprised it scared you, my lord. it scares me just to hear you talk about it.", "oh, keeper, keeper, the bad things i've done are finally taking their toll. i did them for edward's sake and look how he rewards me. oh god, if my prayers don't satisfy you, and you have to avenge the wrongs i've done, at least punish me alone! please spare my innocent wife and children! kind warden, please stay with me for a while. i'm feeling very low, and i need to sleep.", "i'll stay, my lord. may god bring you sleep!", "sorrow interrupts all hours and seasons. it turns everything around the night into morning and noon into night. the only glory princes have are their titles."], ["instead of the pleasures we think they're enjoying, they experience a whole world of worries. it turns out the only difference between them and peasants is their fame.", "ho! who's there?", "what do you want, fellow? and how did you get in here?", "i want to speak with clarence, and i came here on my legs.", "that's it? nothing to add?", "well, sir, it's better to say little than to be tedious. second murderer show him our orders and keep your mouth shut.", "it orders me to hand the noble duke of clarence over to you. i won't ask why because i'd rather not know than feel guilty if you're doing something you shouldn't be. here are the keys, and there is the duke, sleeping. i'll go to the king to let him know i've handed my prisoner over to you.", "you may, sir. that's a wise idea. goodbye."], ["what, should i stab him while he sleeps?", "no. when he wakes up, he'll say we killed him like cowards.", "when he wakes up! why, he won't wake up till judgment day.", "okay, so that's when he'll say we stabbed him in his sleep.", "that word \"judgment\" makes me feel a bit guilty.", "what, are you afraid?", "not of killing him, because i have a warrant for it, but of being damned for killing him, which no warrant can protect me from.", "i thought you were resolved to do this.", "i am resolved to let him live.", "i'll go back to the duke of gloucester and tell him so.", "please, just wait a minute. i'm hoping my holy mood will pass. it usually only lasts about twenty seconds.", "how are you feeling now?", "actually, i'm still feeling some pangs of conscience."], ["remember the reward we're getting when the deed's done.", "jesus, let's kill him! i forgot about the reward.", "where's your conscience now?", "oh, in the duke of gloucester's wallet.", "when he opens his wallet to give us our pay, your conscience will fly out?", "it won't matter. let it fly out. no one will listen to it.", "and what will you do if it returns to you?", "i won't bother with it. conscience makes a man a coward. if he steals, it accuses him. if he wants to swear, it restrains him. if he sleeps with his neighbor's wife, it exposes him. it blushes, is easily embarrassed, and stages regular uprisings in a man's heart. it's just too much trouble. it once made me return a purse full of money that i found it turns anyone who treats it decently into a beggar. it has been thrown out of all sorts of towns and cities it visits, and anyone who wants to live well should learn to trust only himself and live without it.", "my god, now the thing is at elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.", "stop your conscience and don't listen to him. he wants to take over your thoughts and make you sad.", "i'm strong-willed. he won't get the better of me."], ["spoken like a brave man who respects his reputation. shall we get to work?", "we'll hit him on the head with the handles of our swords, then throw him in the wine barrel in the next room.", "what an excellent idea he'll soak up the wine!", "wait a moment. he's waking up.", "strike!", "no, first let's talk to him.", "where are you, keeper? give me a cup of wine.", "you'll have wine enough, my lord, soon.", "in god's name, who are you?", "a man, like you.", "but not a member of the royal family, like me.", "and you're not loyal, like us.", "your voice is loud and commanding, but you look like a working man.", "i'm speaking for the king, but i look like myself."], ["the things you say scare me! your eyes look threatening. and why are you so pale? who sent you here? why are you here?", "to, to, to", "to murder me?", "yes.", "you barely have the heart to tell me, so you can't possibly have the nerve to do it. besides, how have i offended you, my friends?", "you didn't offend us, you offended the king.", "he and i will make up.", "never, my lord. so prepare to die.", "it's your job in life to kill the innocent? what did i do wrong? where's the evidence against me? where's the jury, the judge, the lawful proceedings, the verdict? who pronounced this death sentence before a court of law could even convict me? for you to threaten to kill me is most unlawful. if you hope to have your sins forgiven by christ's dear blood, which he shed for our terrible sins, you must leave and keep your hands off me. you'll go to hell for the deed you're planning to do.", "what we do we have been commanded to do."], ["and the one who commands us is our king.", "wrong-headed slaves, the king of kings says in his ten commandments, \"thou shalt not murder.\" will you defy god and obey a man? be careful. god takes revenge on those who break his laws.", "he does, and now he's taking revenge on you for breaking promises and for murder, too. you took a holy oath to fight for king henry vi.", "and like a traitor to god, you broke that oath and savagely murdered king henry's young son.", "whom you swore you would protect and defend.", "how dare you tell us about god's laws when you have broken them so savagely yourself?", "but for whose sake did i do that sick deed? for my brother edward's sake. he couldn't be sending you to murder me for that sin, because he's the one who asked me to commit it. he is as guilty as i am. if god will be revenged for this deed, he will do it publicly. god doesn't need to use indirect or illegal means to kill those who have offended him."], ["then who were you working for when you killed brave, young prince edward?", "my brother's love, the devil, and my own anger made me do it.", "well, your brother's love, our duty, and your own crimes make us kill .", "if you love my brother, don't hate me. i am his brother, and i love him very much. if you're doing this for pay, go to my brother richard. he will pay you more for saving my life than edward will for killing me.", "you're mistaken. richard, the duke of gloucester, hates you.", "no, he loves and cherishes me. go to him from me.", "we will.", "tell him that when our noble father, the duke of york, gave his three sons his blessing, he never imagined that our friendship would come to this. remind richard of this, and he will weep.", "yes, he'll weep stones, as he taught us to do.", "don't lie about my brother. he is kind."], ["yes, as kind as snow to a harvest. come on, you're fooling yourself. it's richard who sent us here to slaughter you.", "it cannot be. when i left him, he hugged me in his arms and swore between sobs that he would work to set me free.", "well, that's what he's doing making you free to enjoy heaven.", "make peace with god, for you must die, my lord.", "you have enough holy feeling to advise me to \"make peace with god,\" but you're willing to go to war with god by murdering me? oh sirs, consider this: those who sent you to do this deed will hate you for doing it.", "first murderer what should we do?", "relent, and save your souls. if either of you were a prince's son, and you were imprisoned as i am now, and two murderers like yourselves came to you wouldn't you beg for your life? yes, you would beg, if you were in my position.", "relent? no. that's cowardly and womanish."], ["no, sticking to your plan is beastly, savage, devilish. second murderer my friend, i detect some pity in your eyes. please, please take my side and argue for my life. what beggar wouldn't have sympathy for a prince reduced to begging?", "look behind you, my lord.", "take that, and that. clarence if this won't do the job, i'll drown you in the wine barrel in the next room.", "a , and desperately executed. i wish i could wash my hands of this terrible murder, like pilate.", "what's going on? what did you mean by not helping me? by god, i'm going to tell the duke how slack you've been.", "i wish you could tell him i saved his brother. take the money yourself and tell him what i said. i'm sorry this duke was killed."], ["i'm not. go, coward that you are. well, i'll go hide the body in some hole until the duke gives orders for his burial. and when i get my reward, i'll get out of here. the truth about this will come out, and i can't stick around then."], ["well. now i've done a good day's work. you must all keep up this united front. every day i expect a message from god to bring me away from here. now my soul can depart for heaven peacefully, since my friends have made peace here on earth. rivers and hastings, take each other's hand. don't simply hide your hatred. swear your love for each other.", "hastings's i swear i have cleansed my heart of all hate. with this handshake, i guarantee my love.", "on my honor, i feel the same.", "make sure you mean what you say. otherwise god, the ultimate king, will uncover your lies and cause you to be the death of each other.", "on my honor, i swear i love rivers with all my heart.", "and i love hastings with all my heart."], ["queen elizabeth madam, you're not exempt from this nor are you, dorset nor you, buckingham. you have had too many separate factions among you. my dear wife, let lord hastings kiss your hand. and don't do it merely for appearance's sake.", "take my hand, hastings. from now on, i'll forget the hatred i used to feel for you.", "dorset, embrace hastings. hastings, express your affection for the marquess of dorset.", "i swear i will never break this promise of love.", "and so do i, my lord.", "now, noble buckingham, seal this alliance by embracing my wife's friends, and make me happy in your unity."], ["queen elizabeth if i ever turn my hatred toward your majesty, and do not love and cherish you and yours, may god punish me. may i find hatred where i most expect love. when i most need a friend, and when i'm sure i have one, make him treacherous and deceitful to me. i beg god to do all this whenever i fail to show love to you or yours.", "noble buckingham, your promise is like medicine to my ailing heart. all we need to put the final touches on this future peace is for richard to appear.", "and just in time, here he comes with sir richard ratcliffe.", "good morning to my sovereign king and queen. noble peers, how nice to see you.", "happy indeed, the way we have spent the day. gloucester, we have done deeds of charity, turning enmity into peace and hate into love among these mistakenly angry nobles."], ["what blessed work, my king. if there's anyone among this princely group who mistakes me for an enemy if by accident or in anger i have done anything to offend you i want to join with you in peaceful friendship. it kills me to be enemies with you. i hate it and want all good men's love. queen elizabeth first, madam, i want there to be peace between you and me, which i will buy with my obedient service to you. and peace with you, my noble cousin buckingham, if you ever felt any grudge against me; and with you, lord rivers, and, lord grey, with you. in fact, i want to get along with everyone who has frowned on me without good cause dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen, everyone. there is not an englishman alive with whom i'm at odds, anymore than a newborn baby would be. i thank god for my humbleness.", "today shall always be remembered as a holy day. if only all struggles ended this well. one more thing, my dear majesty. please pardon our brother clarence.", "why, madam, have i offered you my love only to be flouted in front of the king? who doesn't know that the good duke is dead?", "you do him wrong to laugh at his corpse."], ["who doesn't know he's dead? who says he is?", "oh my god, what a terrible world this is!", "do i look as pale as everyone else does, lord dorset?", "you do, my good lord. everyone here has turned white.", "is clarence dead? but i reversed the death sentence.", "well, the poor man died by your first order, which was carried by a winged messenger. some tardy cripple must have taken the counter-order, who came after clarence was already buried. it's clear that someone less noble, less loyal, more bloody-minded than clarence but not a blood relation, deserves as bad an end as my brother, but he goes free.", "i ask a favor of you in return for the service i've done, my king.", "please be quiet. my soul is full of sorrow.", "i will not rise until your highness hears me.", "then hurry up and tell me what you want.", "that you lift the death sentence on my servant, who killed a rowdy and belligerent former servant of the duke of norfolk."], ["i was willing to condemn my brother to death, but you want me to pardon a peasant? my brother didn't kill anyone. he was only to blame for some thoughts he had. but his punishment was bitter death. who pleaded with me to pardon life? who, when i was in a rage, kneeled at my feet and told me to reconsider? who talked about brotherhood? who talked about love? who told me how the poor man abandoned the mighty earl of warwick to fight for me? who told me how he rescued me in the field at tewksbury, when oxford had me down, saying, \"dear brother, live and be a king\"? who told me how, when we both lay in the field freezing to death, he wrapped me in his own clothes and spent a numbingly cold night naked? i forgot all of this in my brutish anger, and not one of you had the grace to remind me. but when your servants get drunk and kill someone, you go right down on your knees for \"pardon, pardon.\" and, though he doesn't deserve it, i have to grant your request. but not one of you would speak up for my brother. and i didn't speak to myself on his behalf, either. the best of you owed something to him in his lifetime, but none of you would plead for his life. oh god, i fear your justice will destroy me and all of these men, and their families and mine, because of this! come, hastings, help me to my room. oh, poor clarence."], ["this is what happens when you act rashly. did you notice how the queen's guilty relatives turned pale when they heard about clarence's death? oh, they continually urged the king to do it. god will revenge it. but come, lords, will you come with me to edward's room to comfort him?", "we'll come with you, your grace."], ["tell me, good grandmother, is our father dead?", "no, boy.", "then why do you weep so often, and beat your breast, and cry, \"oh clarence, my unlucky son\"?", "why do you look at us and shake your head, and call us orphans, wretches, castaways, if our noble father is still alive?", "my pretty children, both of you misunderstand me. i'm lamenting the sickness of the king, because i'd hate to lose him i'm not mourning your father's death. what would be the point of crying over someone who was already dead?", "so you're admitting clarence, my father, is dead. my uncle the king is to blame for this. god will take revenge. i will pray every day that he does.", "and so will i.", "quiet, children, quiet. the king loves you very much. innocent sweethearts, you have no idea who's responsible for your father's death."], ["yes we do, grandmother, because my good uncle richard told me. he said the king was forced by the queen to make up charges against my father that would send him to prison. when my uncle explained this to me, he wept and hugged and kissed me. he told me i could rely on him as if he were my father, and he said he would love me as if i were his child.", "ah, it's a shame that a liar can seem so nice, hiding his wicked intentions under a mask of goodness. he is my son, yes, and i'm ashamed of him. but he didn't get his deceitfulness from my breast.", "you think my uncle was lying, grandmother?", "yes, boy.", "i can't believe that. wait! what's that noise?", "no one can stop me now from wailing and weeping about my terrible luck. i don't care if it kills me. i plan to fall into the blackest despair.", "why are you making such a scene?", "i'm simply performing the violent tragedy that is my life: edward my husband, your son, our king is dead. why should we live now that our leader is dead? why are the branches still living when the root is gone? why aren't the leaves withering now that the sap is all dried up?"], ["if you do intend to live, then mourn. if you're going to die, be quick about it so you can catch the king's departing soul or follow him, like obedient subjects, to his new kingdom of endless night.", "as the king's mother, i have a large share in your grief. i have wept at my own good husband's death and only kept myself alive by looking at his sons, the mirror images of him. but now these two mirrors of their princely father have cracked to pieces: my sons are dead. and my only comfort is richard, who is nothing like his father and only causes me shame. you may be a widow, but you're also a mother. you have your children as comfort. but death has snatched my husband from my arms and plucked my two crutches, edward and clarence, from my feeble hands. since your woes are only a portion of mine, i have every reason to surpass your lamentations and drown out your cries with my own.", "queen elizabeth ah, aunt, you didn't weep at our father's death. how can we help you by crying for your sorrow?", "you didn't sympathize with us when we became orphans; we won't cry for you!", "i don't need your help in grieving. i have my own sources of misery. in fact, all the world's springs and oceans flow from my weeping eyes. i could drown the world. my poor husband, my dear edward!"], ["our poor father, clarence!", "my sons edward and clarence!", "what support did i have other than edward? and now he's gone.", "what support did we have besides our father? and now he's gone.", "what support did i have besides my two sons? and now they're both gone.", "there has never been a widow who suffered such loss as me.", "there have never been orphans who've suffered what we have.", "there was never a mother who suffered so much loss. alas, i am the mother of all these others' griefs. each of them has a single loss, while i share them all. she weeps for edward and so do i, while she does not weep for clarence, though i do. these young children cry for clarence and so do i, though they don't cry for edward, as i do. alas, all of you can turn to me with your sorrow, because i feel all of it. i will comfort you by adding my own grief to your sorrow."], ["queen elizabeth calm down, dear mother. god is unhappy that you've responded so unthankfully to his doings. in everyday life, when a person is unwilling to pay back a loan that was generously offered, he's considered ungrateful. how much worse it is when heaven is the lender, as in your case?", "be a careful mother, madam, and think about your son, the young prince. send for him right away and have him crowned. your peace of mind depends on him. bury your sorrows in dead edward's grave and plant your hopes in prince edward's rise to the throne.", "sister, calm down. all of us have reason to mourn the dimming of our shining star the king. but no good comes from all this wailing. oh, mother, forgive me. i didn't see you there. on my knee, i humbly ask your blessing.", "god bless you and make you obedient, loving, and kind.", "amen. and make me die a good old man! that should be the point of a mother's blessing. i'm surprised my mother forgot to make it."], ["you mournful princes and grieving gentlemen who have been sharing this burden of grief, now it's time to cheer each other up with love. though we have lost a generous king, we are about to enjoy the benefits of a new king. we must preserve our goodwill toward each other and not break into factions again. i think a few members of the court should fetch the young prince from wales and bring him to london to be crowned our king.", "why only a few courtiers, my lord of buckingham?", "because if many of us go there, the hostility between us may break out again, which would be very dangerous with the young prince so newly crowned. when you have a situation where everyone seems free to take off on his or her own, it's important that the heads of state keep a low profile. we wouldn't want the prince or his new authority to be undermined by squabbling factions.", "the king made peace among all of us. i, at least, intend to stick to our agreement to get along.", "and so do i. i think we all do. but, since our agreement is a recent development, it shouldn't be put to the test, which could happen if the coronation turned into a huge ceremony. so, i agree with noble buckingham only a few should go to meet the prince.", "i think so too."], ["then we're agreed. now we need to figure out which of us will go to meet him. madam and mother, will you go to offer your support to this weighty business?", "for god's sake, my lord, let's be sure to be part of the group that meets the prince. along the way, i'll find an opportunity to separate him from the queen's proud relatives, as step one in the plan we've discussed.", "you are my other self, my oracle, my prophet, my dear brother! i plan to act like a child and do exactly what you say. to wales then, for we will not be left out."], ["good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?", "i'm telling you, i hardly know myself. did you hear the news that's going around?", "yes, that the king is dead.", "bad news, by god. the news is always bad. but this news is bound to make the world go mad.", "neighbors, hello.", "good day to you, sir.", "is it true that good king edward has died?", "yes, sir, it's all too true, god help us.", "then, gentlemen, we can count on trouble.", "no, no, with god's help, his son will be king.", "it's bad news when a country is ruled by a child.", "his counselors will govern as long as he's a minor, and then he'll take over. it shouldn't go so badly."], ["that's how it was with henry the sixth, who was crowned in paris when he was only nine months old.", "really? but at that point, the king had the benefit of excellent counselors. his uncles were good men and protected him.", "well, this king has uncles too, on both his father and mother's side.", "it would be better if they were all on his father's side, or that there were none at all on his father's side. as it is, the rivalry between his father's and mother's relatives over who will be closest to the king is likely to endanger everyone, if we're not lucky.as it stands, there's a struggle between the two sides for the prince's attention. richard, the duke of gloucester, is very dangerous, and the queen's sons and brothers are haughty and proud it would be better for this ailing country if they were subjects, not rulers.", "come, come, we're worrying about the worst-case scenario. i'm sure everything will be fine.", "when the day turns cloudy, wise men put on their coats. when leaves fall from the trees, it means winter has arrived. when the sun sets, who's too stupid to recognize it's night? when storms arrive early, you can expect the harvest will be damaged. so, if all turns out fine, as you say, it's more than we deserve or i expect.", "it's true, people are really worried. it's hard to find a person who isn't."], ["it's always like this in times of change. by some sort of deep instinct, we always know when danger is approaching, just as we know that a storm is coming when the sea swells. but leave it all to god. where are you all off to?", "the court has sent for us.", "for me, too. i'll go with you."], ["last night, i hear, they stayed in stony stratford. tonight they will rest in northhampton. they'll be here tomorrow or the next day.", "i'm dying to see the prince. i hope he's grown a lot since i last saw him.", "but i hear he hasn't. they say my son york has almost passed him in height.", "yes, mother, but i wish i hadn't.", "why, dear child? it's good to grow.", "grandmother, one night when we were eating dinner, my uncle rivers mentioned that i had grown more than my brother. \"yes,\" said my uncle gloucester, \"small plants are graceful, while ugly weeds grow fast.\" and since then, i've wished i wouldn't grow so fast, because sweet flowers are slow while the weeds grow in a hurry.", "well, it certainly wasn't true for richard! as a child, he took such a long time to grow up that, according to his rule, he should have grown up into a gracious adult.", "and no doubt he is, gracious madam."], ["i hope he is, but mothers get to have their doubts.", "hey, if i'd remembered something about him, i could have had a good comeback for my uncle, touching on his growth worse than he touched on mine.", "what would you have said, my young york? do tell.", "indeed, they say my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw on a crust of bread when he was two hours old. it took me two years before i had a single tooth. grandmother, this would have been a biting joke.", "pretty york, who told you about his teeth?", "his nurse, grandmother.", "his nurse? why, she was dead before you were even born.", "well, if it wasn't her, i don't know.", "a mischievous child. come, come, you are too clever for your own good.", "good lady, don't be angry with the child.", "little pitchers have big ears.", "here comes a messenger. what's the news?", "my lord, it's news i wish i didn't have to report."], ["how's the prince?", "he's fine and healthy, madam.", "what is your news?", "lord rivers and lord grey have been imprisoned in so has sir thomas vaughan.", "who sent them there?", "the powerful dukes gloucester and buckingham.", "what did they do wrong?", "i've told you everything i know. why the nobles were imprisoned, and on what charges, i don't know, my gracious lord.", "oh no! i see the downfall of my family. the tiger has seized the gentle deer: a tyrant has begun to attack the weak, innocent king. welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre! i can see how all this will end as clearly as if i was looking at a map."], ["how many times have i had to live through cursed times of violent struggle? my husband lost his life to get the crown, and my sons' fortunes have been tossed up and down, leaving me to rejoice over their victories and weep over their losses. and once one of them achieved the throne and had taken care of domestic quarrels, they made war among themselves. it's a preposterous outrage. let it end, or let me die so i won't have to watch any more of it.", "york come, my boy, let's go to . madam, farewell.", "wait, i'll go with you.", "you have no reason to.", "queen elizabeth my gracious lady, go, and take your money and with you. for my part, i'll reassign the great seal of england to you and will take it upon myself to protect you. come, i'll conduct you to the sanctuary."], ["welcome, sweet prince, to london, the capital of the king.", "welcome, dear nephew, king of all my thoughts. the tiring journey seems to have made you gloomy.", "it wasn't the journey itself, uncle, but the troubles we encountered that made it wearisome and dull. i want more uncles here to welcome me.", "sweet prince, you're just an innocent child. you don't really understand how capable people are of trickery. all you know is what a man shows you, which has little to do with what he's really thinking. those uncles that you wish were here were dangerous. your grace heard their saccharine words, but didn't take note of their poisonous intentions. god protect you from them and from other false friends!", "god should keep me from false friends, but they weren't false.", "my lord, the mayor of london is here to greet you."], ["god bless your grace with health and happy days.", "thank you, my good lord, thank you all. i thought my mother and my brother, york, would have met us on our way here long before now. and what a slug hastings is that he hasn't even arrived to tell us whether they're coming!", "and, just in time, here comes the sweaty lord.", "welcome, my lord. what, isn't my mother coming?", "god knows why, but your mother and your brother have taken sanctuary in westminster abbey. your sweet brother wanted to come meet you, but his mother wouldn't let him.", "damn, what a sneaky and spiteful course your mother is taking! lord cardinal, will you please persuade the queen to hurry and send the duke of york here? go with him, lord hastings, and if she refuses, take the boy from her by force.", "my lord of buckingham, if my weak skills of persuasion convince his mother to part with the duke of york, you can expect him here shortly. but if she resists my mild pleas, let god in heaven forbid us from disobeying the holy laws of the sanctuary and taking the child from her. i wouldn't commit so serious a crime for anything."], ["you are too inexplicably stubborn, my lord, too stuck on ceremony. in these less dainty times, you're not breaking the laws of sanctuary to seize him. it's only a sanctuary for those who really need protection or those who are smart enough to claim they do. the prince has done neither; therefore, in my opinion, he isn't really protected by sanctuary. you're not breaking any holy laws to take him away. often i have heard of \"sanctuary men,\" but until now i've never heard of \"sanctuary children.\"", "my lord, you've won me over this time. lord hastings, will you go with me?", "i'm coming, my lord.", "go as fast as you can.", "say, uncle richard, if my brother comes, where will i stay till my coronation?", "whatever seems best to you. if i can give you some advice, if i were you, i would stay in the tower for a day or two. then you can stay wherever best suits your health and entertainment needs.", "of all places, i don't like the . didn't julius caesar build it, my lord?"], ["he started it, my noble lord, and succeeding generations rebuilt it.", "is it on record that he built it, or is it just word of mouth?", "on record, my gracious lord.", "well, i think that even if it weren't on record, the truth would be remembered from one generation to the next all the way to doomsday.", "as the saying goes, \"those that are this wise when they're this young won't live long.\"", "what did you say, uncle?", "i said, \"when there are no written records, a person's fame lasts for a long time.\" like , i get two meanings out of one word.", "that julius caesar was a famous man. his courage helped his cleverness, and his cleverness made sure that his reputation for being courageous outlived him. death didn't conquer conqueror, for he lives on in his fame, even though he's dead. i'll tell you what, my cousin buckingham"], ["what, my dear lord?", "if i live to be a man, i'll win again or die a soldier, as honorably as i lived as a king.", "as the saying goes, \"short summers often have an early spring.\" this smarty-pants won't live long.", "making good time, here's the duke of york.", "richard of york, how are you doing, my loving brother?", "very well, my supreme lord that's what i have to call you now.", "yes, brother, i feel bad about that, too. the man who might have kept that title died too soon, and now it isn't worth nearly as much.", "how's my nephew doing, noble lord of york?", "thank you for asking, uncle. oh, my lord, you once said that lazy weeds grow fast. the prince has far outgrown me.", "he has, my lord.", "does that mean he's lazy?"], ["oh, my handsome nephew, i must not say that.", "in that case, he's more obliged to you than i am.", "he may command me as my king, but you still have power over me as a relative.", "uncle, please give me your dagger.", "my dagger, little nephew? with all my heart.", "are you begging, brother?", "from my kind uncle, who i know will give it to me, especially as it's not worth much.", "i'll give you a greater gift than that, nephew.", "a greater gift? that must mean a sword.", "yes, gentle cousin, if it were light enough for you.", "oh, i see, you will only part with lightweight presents. for more important things, you'll say no.", "a sword's too heavy for you to wear.", "i wouldn't think much of it even if it were heavier.", "what, do you want to wear weapon, little lord?", "i do, so i can thank you for what you called me.", "what's that?"], ["\"little.\"", "the lord of york is always a bit perverse in his chatter. but, uncle, you know how to bear with him.", "you mean, to bear me, not to bear me. uncle, my brother makes fun of both of us. because i'm little, like an , he thinks you should bear me on your shoulders, like a fool.", "what a sharp mind this boy has! to make up for his scorn toward his uncle, he makes fun of himself as well. it's amazing that he's so cunning at his age.", "prince my lord, will you please continue on your way to the tower? my good cousin buckingham and i will go to your mother and ask her to meet you there.", "prince what, you're going to the tower, my lord?", "my protector, richard, insists on it.", "i can't sleep quietly in the tower.", "why, what are you afraid of?", "my uncle clarence's angry ghost. my grandmother told me he was murdered there."], ["i'm not afraid of dead uncles.", "nor living ones, i hope.", "well, i hope not. york but come, my lord. with a heavy heart, thinking about my dead uncles, i will go to the tower.", "richard, don't you think this chattering little york was encouraged to taunt you by his sneaky mother in that outrageous way?", "no doubt, no doubt. oh, he's a dangerously clever boy bold, quick-witted, capable. he's his mother's child from head to toe.", "well, enough about them. come here, catesby. you've sworn to participate in our plot and to keep it a secret. what do you think: wouldn't it be easy to convince lord hastings to join us in installing richard as king of england?", "hastings loved the prince's father so much that we won't be able to persuade him to do anything against the prince.", "what about stanley? won't he join us?", "he'll do whatever hastings does."], ["okay, just do this, noble catesby: sound out lord hastings, but make it seem as if you're just mulling over the idea, that it hasn't been firmed up yet. invite him to come to the tower tomorrow for the coronation ceremony. if he seems game to our plan, encourage him to join us and explain all our reasons. but if he's resistant and chilly, then be like that too and break off the conversation. let us know how he responds. tomorrow we're going to hold two separate meetings, one for those who are with us and one for those who aren't. you'll have a lot to do in these meetings.", "give my regards to hastings, catesby. tell him the nest of dangerous enemies that plagued him for years will die tomorrow at pomfret. and tell him to give shore one extra kiss to celebrate this good news.", "good catesby, do your work well.", "my good lords, i plan to.", "will we hear from you before bedtime, catesby?", "you will, my lord.", "you'll find us both at crosby place.", "now, my lord, what are we going to do if we find that lord hastings won't go along with our plans?"], ["chop off his head. whatever we decide to do. and when i'm king, remember to ask me for the earldom of hereford and all the possessions that go with it, which my brother the king used to own.", "i look forward to that present.", "you'll find i'll give it to you very willingly. come, let's have an early dinner so that we have time to work out our plans."], ["my lord, my lord.", "who's knocking?", "a messenger from lord stanley.", "what time is it?", "four o'clock in the morning.", "can't lord stanley sleep?", "i guess not for good reason, as you'll soon hear. first, he sends his regards.", "and then?", "and then he said to tell you that tonight he dreamed the duke of gloucester cut off his helmet that is, his head. besides that, he says that two meetings are going to be held tomorrow, and something may be decided at one of them that may make you and him, who are at the other, sorry. he wants to know if instead of going to the meeting, you'll get on your horse and ride north with him to get out of harm's way."], ["go, man, return to your lord and tell him not to worry about the separate meetings. while he and i are at one, my loyal servant catesby will be at the other, so nothing will happen that we won't find out about. tell your master there is no sound basis for his worries. and as for his dreams, i'm surprised he's so foolish as to trust the fantasies of a restless night. if we flee from the boar before the boar even pursues us, we'll only make the boar angry and suspicious, causing him to chase us when he never intended to. tell your master to get up and come here, and we'll go together to the tower to meet the , who will treat us well, as he'll see.", "i'll go, my lord, and tell him what you say.", "good morning, my noble lord.", "good day, catesby. you're up early. what news can you tell me in this fast-moving, unsteady state of ours?", "our world sure is spinning fast, my lord. i believe it won't stop moving and stand upright till richard wears the wreath of the realm.", "what do you mean, \"wears the wreath\"? are you talking about the crown?"], ["yes, my good lord.", "i'll have my head cut from my shoulders before i'll see the crown so misplaced. but do you think that's what he's aiming for?", "yes, i swear, and he hopes you'll join his party to help. for that reason he sends you this good news that this very day your enemies, the queen's relatives, will die at pomfret.", "well, i'm not sorry to hear that, because they have always been my enemies. but the idea that i'd give my support to richard and keep my master king edward iv's true heirs from the crown never. god knows i'd die before i'd do that.", "well, let's hope you stay in that noble frame of mind.", "in a year, when things have calmed down, i'll laugh about how those who got king edward iv to hate me are now brought low. but as for now before two weeks have gone by, i'm going to send some people packing. they have no idea what's coming.", "it's a horrible thing to die when you're not prepared for it, my gracious lord.", "yes, monstrous, monstrous! that's how it will be for rivers, vaughan, and grey. that's how it will be for some other men, too, who think they're as safe as you and i, who are well-loved by noble richard and buckingham."], ["richard and buckingham have a high opinion of you. so high they'll stick your head on the .", "i know they do, and i certainly deserve it.", "come on, come on, where is your spear for the boar, man? you're afraid of the boar but you go around without your spear?", "my lord, good morning. good morning, catesby. go ahead and laugh at me, but by jesus, i don't like these separate meetings i really don't.", "my lord, my life is as important to me as yours is to you, and it was never as precious to me as it is now. do you think i would be feeling as triumphant as i am if i didn't know that our situation was secure?", "when the lords who are imprisoned at pomfret left london, they also were in a good mood and supposed their situation was secure. and they also had no reason to worry. but you see how soon the day got cloudy for them. richard's sudden, hateful attack on them makes me worry. i hope to god i'm proven wrong! well, should we head to the tower? the day is well on its way."], ["come on, let's get going. you know what, my lord? those men you just mentioned will be beheaded today.", "they deserved to keep their heads more than some people who have managed to keep their positions. but come, my lord, let's go.", "go on ahead. i'll talk with this good man.", "what's up, man? how's it going?", "better, since your lordship was nice enough to ask.", "i tell you, man, it's better for me, too, than the last time we met here. then i was on my way to the tower, where i was going to be locked up thanks to the false charges of the queen's allies. but now, i tell you keep it to yourself, though those enemies of mine are being put to death today, and i'm better than i've ever been.", "well, let's hope your good fortune continues!", "thanks a lot, mister. here, drink to me.", "god be good to you!"], ["a nice coincidence, my lord. i'm glad to see you.", "i thank you, sir john, with all my heart. i am indebted to you for your last sermon. by next week, i'll be able to pay you.", "i'll come to you, your lordship.", "what, talking with a priest, hastings? your friends at pomfret, they're the ones who need a priest. you, on the other hand, don't have any confessions you have to make.", "when i ran into this holy man, those men you mentioned did come to mind, in fact. are you headed to the tower?", "i am, my lord. but i won't be there for long. i'll be off before you are.", "yes, probably, because i'm staying for lunch.", "and for dinner, too, though you don't know it. hastings come, are you going?", "i'll follow you, my lord."], ["sir richard ratcliffe, let me tell you this. today you will witness a person die for truth, duty, and loyality.", "ratcliffe god protect the prince from all of you. you're a group of damned bloodsuckers!", "ratcliffe you'll live to regret this.", "hurry up. your lives are over.", "oh, pomfret, pomfret! oh, you bloody prison, fatal and threatening to noble lords! within these guilty walls, richard ii was hacked to death. and now, to add more blood to its name, we're losing our innocent lives here.", "now margaret's curse has fallen on our heads, for standing by and doing nothing when richard stabbed her son.", "she cursed richard then. she cursed buckingham then. she cursed hastings then. oh god, remember to hear her prayer for them, just as for us! but don't kill my sister and her royal sons, be satisfied, dear god, with our blood, which is being spilled unjustly, as you know."], ["hurry up. the hour of death is approaching.", "come, grey. come, vaughan. let's embrace and say goodbye until we meet again in heaven."], ["now, noble lords, the reason we're meeting is to determine the day the prince will be crowned. in god's name, speak. when should the royal day be?", "is everything ready for that event?", "it is. all we have to do is name the day.", "tomorrow's a good day.", "who knows what the lord protector thinks? who's closest to him?", "you, i think, would best know what he's thinking.", "we know each other's faces, but as for our thoughts, he doesn't know any more about my thinking than i do about yours or his or you do about mine. lord hastings, you and he are close.", "thank you. i know he holds me dear, but i haven't asked him about the coronation, and he hasn't told me. but you, my noble lords, may name a time, and i'll second it on the duke's behalf, which i don't think he'll mind."], ["right on cue, here's the duke himself.", "my noble lords and relatives, good morning. i slept in. but i hope i didn't delay any important decisions.", "if you hadn't shown up on cue, my lord, lord hastings was going to take your part i mean, he was going to speak for you in the crowning of the king.", "no one may be bolder than my lord hastings. he knows me well and loves me well. ely, when i was last at your palace, i saw some great strawberries in your garden. i beg you, send someone to bring some of them.", "yes, my lord. with pleasure.", "buckingham, i need to have a word with you. catesby has sounded hastings out and found the prickly gentleman so opposed to our plan that he actually said he would die before he'd agree to have his \"master's son,\" as he put it so devotedly, lose the crown.", "move to the other room, my lord. i'll come soon."], ["we have not yet set the coronation day. tomorrow, in my opinion, is too soon. i myself am not as well-equipped as i would be if the day were put off a bit.", "where is my lord, the duke of gloucester? i have sent for the strawberries.", "richard is looking cheerful today. you always know he's got some plan that pleases him when he says good morning with such gusto. i don't think there's a man under the sun who's worse at hiding his love or hate than richard. you know his feelings immediately just by looking at his face.", "and what feelings did you see in his face today?", "that he's not angry with anyone here. if he were, he would have shown it.", "i pray to god he isn't.", "tell me, all of you, what punishment does a person deserve who conspires to kill me with witchcraft and who has already plagued my body with black magic?"], ["because i love your grace, i say that whoever the offenders are deserve to die.", "then see the evidence of their evil with your own eyes. look how i've been bewitched! see how my arm has become like a withered tree-branch? this is the work of edward's wife, that monstrous witch, who is in league with that tramp shore. they have used witchcraft to harm me.", "if they have done this thing, my noble lord", "if? you lover of that damned whore, you're talking to me of \"ifs\"? you're a traitor. off with his head. by saint paul, i swear i won't eat lunch until i see him beheaded. lovell and ratcliffe, make sure it gets done. the rest of you who love me, come with me.", "i pity england, but not myself. i was too foolish. i might have prevented this. stanley dreamed the boar beheaded him, and i laughed and refused to flee with him. three times today my horse stumbled and started when he looked in the direction of the tower, as if he hated to carry me to this slaughterhouse. oh, now i really need that priest who spoke to me today!"], ["and i regret having bragged to the messenger about how my enemies were being butchered at pomfret while i, as i said, was in good standing with richard. oh margaret, margaret, your heavy curse has now landed on poor hastings's miserable head!", "hurry up the duke wants to eat his dinner. make your confession short. he's eager to see your head.", "we spend more time seeking out the fleeting glories of this temporary world than looking to the permanent grace of god! anyone who builds his hopes on air lives like a drunken sailor hanging on a mast, ready with every dizzy nod of his head to tumble to the bottom of the sea. the things we worry about, like good looks and possessions, aren't lasting, and they don't matter.", "come, come, hurry up. it's pointless to talk now.", "oh bloody richard! miserable england, i foresee for you the most frightening time you have ever experienced. come, lead me to the block. bring him my head. those who smile at it will soon be dead themselves."], ["tell me, cousin, i need to know if you can shake like you've got a fever, turn pale all of a sudden, and stop speaking in the middle of a word as if you were driven crazy with fear.", "oh please, i can imitate the best tragic actor around. i can speak and then look all around, and tremble, and start at a mere piece of straw as if i were paranoid. frightening looks are also at my service, as are fake smiles. anytime i need them, they're waiting to do my bidding. but has catesby gone?", "he has. but here he is, back with the mayor.", "lord mayor", "watch out for the over there!", "listen! a drum!", "catesby, look over the top of these walls to see if anyone's there."], ["lord mayor, the reason we have sent", "look behind you! defend yourself! there are enemies here.", "god defend and guard us innocents against them!", "stay calm. they're friends ratcliffe and lovell.", "here's the head of that notorious traitor, the dangerous and unsuspected hastings.", "i loved this man so much it makes me weep. i took him to be the plainest, most harmless christian on earth. he was the book in which i recorded all of my most secret thoughts. he was so slick in covering over his plans that if it hadn't been for his love affair with shore's wife, i would never have suspected him.", "well, well, he was the most covert traitor who ever lived. would you believe, if we hadn't caught him, this subtle traitor would have murdered the lord of gloucester and me in the council room today?", "he would have?"], ["what, do you think we're turks or savages, instead of christians? you think we would have disobeyed the law and proceeded to kill this villain if england's peace and our own lives hadn't been at stake?", "i hope nothing else like this ever happens to you! this man deserved his death. and you, my good lords, were right to warn other traitors from trying the same.", "i didn't expect any better from him once he got involved with mistress shore. but we had decided that he shouldn't die until you were able to come witness his execution. (which was prevented by the haste of our friends, lovell and ratcliffe here, who went against what we intended somewhat in their hurry to protect us). if you could have heard the traitor speak for himself and confess the exact way he planned to murder us, you could have told the citizens what terrible intentions he had, though now they're likely to misconstrue what we did and wail over his death.", "but, my good lord, the words of you and lord buckingham are as trustworthy to me as if i had seen and heard him speak myself. and do not doubt, you honest, noble princes, that i'll let our citizens know how fairly you proceeded in this case.", "that is exactly why we wanted you here, your lordship to avoid the public carping and complaints."], ["but since you've come too late to see the execution as we intended, at least let people know what you we intended. and so, good lord mayor, we bid you goodbye.", "follow him, buckingham. he's traveling at a gallop to the london meeting hall. there, as soon as you have a chance, drop the hint that edward's children are bastards. tell the citizens how edward put to death a citizen just because the citizen said he was going to make his own son \"heir to the crown\" when all the citizen meant was that he owned a tavern called \"the crown\" and was going to leave it to his son. and then point out what a lech edward was and what a bestial appetite he had for women, which touched even the citizens' own servants, daughters, and wives. there was no limit to what his lustful eye and savage heart would prey on. and, if you need to, approach the subject of me: tell them that when my mother became pregnant with the insatiable edward, my noble father was fighting in france. with a little calculating, it's obvious that edward is not in fact my father's child not a surprising revelation if you consider how my father the noble duke looked nothing like this man. but only hint at this vaguely, because, as you know, my mother's still alive."], ["don't worry, my lord, i'll be as eloquent as if the golden crown i'm pleading for were for myself. goodbye, my lord.", "if things go well, bring the crowd to castle, where i'll be surrounded by priests and learned bishops.", "i'm off. around three or four o'clock, look for news from the meeting hall.", "lovell, go as fast as you can to doctor shaw. ratcliffe go to friar penker. both of you, tell these men to meet me in less than an hour at baynard's castle.", "now i'll go inside and write out a secret order to keep clarence's brats out of sight and to forbid anyone whatsoever from seeing king edward's sons."], ["here's the indictment of the good lord hastings, which has been written out in a clear hand, like any legal document, so it can be read aloud in public outside st. paul's cathedral. and look how well this sequence of events holds together: after catesby brought the indictment to me last night, i spent eleven hours copying it. the original took just as long to write out. so that's twenty-two hours. and yet five hours ago, lord hastings was alive, untouched, free, at liberty. what a backward world we live in! why, who's so stupid that he can't see through this fraud? but who's so blind to the consequences of speaking out that he'll admit what he knows? the world is a bad place, where you can't speak what you know."], ["so what did the citizens say?", "it's incredible they didn't say a word.", "did you mention that edward's children are bastards?", "i did. i talked about how he was engaged to , and how he was engaged to through the help of the earl of warwick. i spoke of the unquenchable greediness of edward's desires and the way he forced himself on the wives of londoners. i mentioned the way he punished people harshly for minor offenses. i said he was not the son of the noble duke of york, because your father was in france when he was conceived, which explains why he doesn't have anything in common with his father. and then i suggested that you were the spitting image of your father, both in the way you look and in the nobleness of your character. i went into all your victories in scotland, your skill as a warrior, your wisdom in peacetime, your generosity, your goodness, and your exceptional modesty. indeed, i left nothing out. and when my oration came to a close, i asked those who loved their country to cry, \"god save richard, england's royal king!\"", "and did they?"], ["no, god help me, they didn't say a word. like silent statues or stones that breathed, they just gazed at each other and turned as pale as the dead. when i saw this, i scolded them and asked the mayor what this stubborn silence meant. he said that the people weren't used to being spoken to except by the . so i urged the recorder to repeat my tale you know, \"the duke of buckingham said this, buckingham meant that,\" but nothing on his own authority. when he was done, a few followers of my own at the far end of the hall hurled their caps in the air. some ten voices cried, \"god save king richard!\" i jumped on this slender opportunity and said, \"thank you, noble citizens and friends. this widespread applause and enthusiastic shouts make clear you stand behind richard.\" and then i broke off and quickly came away.", "what blocks of wood! they wouldn't say anything? aren't the mayor and his fellow citizens coming?", "the mayor is here at hand. pretend you're afraid, my lord, and don't speak until you're pleaded with. and make sure to carry a prayer book in your hand and to stand between two priests, okay? then i'll have the grounds to build a holy sermon about why you should be king. but don't be easily won over. act like a virgin, always answering \"no,\" but taking it in the end.", "i'm going now. if you're as good at pleading to them as i am at saying no to you, this will definitely come to a happy end."], ["hurry, go up to the roof. the lord mayor is knocking.", "welcome, my lord. i'm twiddling my thumbs waiting for the duke to show up. i don't think he wants to be disturbed.", "here comes his servant. now, catesby, what does your lord say to my request?", "my lord, he asks that you please visit him tomorrow or the next day. he's inside in prayer, with two reverend fathers. he doesn't want to be disturbed in his holy work by any worldly requests.", "return to the gracious duke, good catesby. tell him that the mayor, some citizens, and i have come to confer with his grace in matters of great importance concerning the general good.", "i'll tell him right away, my lord."], ["ah, my lord, this prince is nothing like edward! he is not lolling in bed but on his knees in prayer. he's not enjoying himself with a couple of prostitutes but studying with two learned priests. he's not sleeping to fatten up his lazy body, but praying, to nourish his attentive soul. england would be lucky to have this virtuous prince as king. but i'm afraid we'll never get him to agree to be king.", "but god forbid he says no to us!", "i'm afraid he will. here comes catesby again.", "what's up, catesby, what does your master say?", "my lord, he wonders why you have assembled such troops of citizens to speak with him, since he had no idea they were coming. my lord, he's afraid you mean him harm.", "i'm sorry my noble brother is suspicious of me. by god, i'm here because i love him. return and tell him so.", "when devoutly religious men are praying, it's hard to draw them out of it, because they get lost in the wonder of their contemplation."], ["see how he stands between two clergymen!", "two props of virtue for a christian prince, to prevent him from ever becoming vain. and, see, he has a prayer book in each hand, the signs of a holy man. most gracious prince of the famous house of plantagenet, pardon us for interrupting your righteous, christian prayer. please listen favorably to our request.", "my lord, you don't need to apologize. i beg you to pardon me. i've been so intent on serving god that i've kept my friends waiting. in any case, what would you like?", "only what, i hope, will please god above and all good men on this island, which currently has no king.", "i suspect that i have committed some offence to the city and you have come to reprimand me for not knowing better.", "you have, my lord. i hope you'll make up for it!", "why else would i live in a christian country, if i can't ask forgiveness for my faults?"], ["then you should know that we take fault with your resigning the supreme seat, the majestic throne, the sceptered office, of your ancestors the power and greatness that destiny and your noble birth have handed you to the wrong person. you aren't respecting the lineage of your royal family. you're lost in sleepy thoughts, and we have come to wake you to our country's needs. this noble island has been compromised. she is scarred by the infamous deeds of king edward iv. her royal stock has been corrupted and nearly lost. we want that royalty remembered again. we heartily beg you, in all your goodness, to take upon yourself the responsibility and rule of this land, not merely as a servant, substitute, or other lowly agent of the king, but as the king himself. it is your birthright to be king. it's for this reason that we are here the citizens of england and your devoted friends. we strongly urge you on.", "i can't tell which is the better course of action, to leave in silence or to scold you. if i don't answer, perhaps you'll think i'm accepting the heavy responsibility you foolishly want to impose on me. but if i do speak and refuse your request, then i'm guilty of reprimanding my friends, who have been faithful and loving toward me. so, i'll speak to make clear i don't want the crown but also that i am grateful to you. here is my definitive answer: thank you for your love, but i'm going to have to turn down your weighty request because i don't deserve to be king. first of all, even if all the obstacles were eliminated and my path led straight to the crown if it were truly my birthright i would rather hide from my greatness than hide inside the greatness of the position itself and be smothered by it. my spirit is poor, and i have so many terrible defects that as king i would be like a little boat tossed about on a mighty sea. so, thank god, there is no real need for me, as i wouldn't be able to help you much. the royal tree has left us other fruit, which, with time, will do just fine on the throne and make us all happy as king, i'm sure. someone other than i has the right and the good fortune to be made king. god forbid that i snatch the crown from him."], ["my lord, what you've said makes clear you have a conscience, but your objections are trivial, given the circumstances. you say that prince edward is your brother's son. we agree, but not by your brother's wife. king edward was going to marry lady lucy your mother can vouch for that and then he was betrothed to bona, the king of france's sister-in-law. but both of these were put off by elizabeth grey, a careworn mother of many children who had once been a beauty but was now a stressed-out widow long past her prime. nevertheless, under pretence of asking a favor of him, she attracted his lustful eye and seduced him so thoroughly that he completely debased himself, committing adultery with her. it resulted in this edward, whom we're polite enough to call \"prince.\" out of respect for the living, i'll restrain myself from telling you everything. but, my good lord, if you don't care about this country, at least use your own pure lineage to rescue us from the current corruption of the royal line."], ["yes, my good lord, your citizens beg you.", "don't refuse the love we offer you.", "oh, make them joyful! grant their law-abiding request!", "alas, why would you heap all these responsibilities on me? i am unfit to rule and to be king. please, don't take it badly, but i cannot and will not give in to you.", "perhaps you refuse our request out of love for your brother's son. you don't want to depose the child. we know how tender your heart is and what gentle, kind, womanly feelings you have for your relatives, as well as for people from all walks of life. but listen, if won't become king, we'll just get someone else, to the disgrace and ruin of your family. we will not have your brother's son as king. on this note, we're leaving. come, citizens. damn it, i'm not going to beg anymore!"], ["oh, please don't swear, my lord of buckingham.", "call them back, my lord, and accept their request. if you refuse it, the whole country will regret it.", "would you tie me to a whole world of worries? well, call them back again. i am not made of stone; i am affected by all these kind pleas, though it goes against my conscience and my soul.", "buckingham, my brother, and you wise, serious men, since you intend to force me to take responsibility for these changing times, whether i want to or not, i'm going to have to be brave and endure the load. but if this imposition you've put on me happens to result in dark scandal or ugly reproach, the fact that you forced me to accept this should clear me from blame. god knows, and you may have noticed, i'm not to eager to take on this job.", "god bless your grace! we understand you're just doing it for us, and we'll be sure to say so.", "if you say that, you'll only be telling the truth."], ["then i salute you with this royal title: long live richard, england's worthy king!", "amen.", "will you be crowned tomorrow?", "whenever you want, since you're the one who wants it.", "tomorrow, then, we will wait on your grace. now we'll take our leave joyfully.", "come, let us get back to praying. farewell, my cousin; farewell, noble friends."], ["who's this? my granddaughter, with her kind aunt, the duchess of gloucester, leading her by the hand? now, on my life, the young child must be headed to the tower to greet the young princes, whom she adores. daughter, how nice to see you.", "good afternoon!", "the same to you, good sister. where are you going?", "just to the tower i'm guessing, for the same reason you are: to salute the noble princes who are staying there.", "yes, kind sister. we can all go together.", "and here comes the warden, just in time. officer, please tell us, if you will, how are the prince and my little son, york?", "they're just fine, my dear madam. but i'm sorry i'm not allowed to let you visit them. the king has strictly forbidden it."], ["the king? who's that?", "i meant to say the lord protector.", "the lord keep him from the title of king! richard has set boundaries between my love and theirs? i am their mother. who's going to keep me from them?", "i am their father's mother. i will see them.", "i am their aunt, and i love them like a mother. so take me to see them. officer, i'll take the responsibility from you, and the blame too.", "no, madam, no. i can't do this. i am bound by oath, so please forgive me.", "in just an hour from now, duchess of york, i'll be saluting you as the mother of two beautiful queens. anne come, madam, you must go straight to westminster abbey, where you will be crowned richard's queen.", "oh, cut my bodice-staps so that my pent-up heart can have some room to breathe, or i'll faint from this deadly news!", "cruel, cruel news!", "queen elizabeth cheer up, mother. how are you feeling?"], ["oh, dorset, don't waste your time talking to me. leave. death and destruction are following at your heels. your mother's name has become a threat to her own children. if you want to outrun death, go cross the sea to france and stay with , out of the reach of hell. go, get out of here, get out of this slaughterhouse. otherwise you'll just increase the number of the dead, and make me die the slave of margaret's curse, no longer a mother, a wife, or england's queen.", "madam, your advice is wise and caring. dorset, take advantage of the time you have. i'll write to my stepson richmond on your behalf, so that he'll meet you on the way. but don't delay.", "o, this evil wind that spreads nothing but misery. o, my cursed womb it's a deathbed, really, since richard came out of it. it has hatched a , whose gaze kills whatever it lands on.", "anne come, madam, come. i was sent in a hurry.", "i go unwillingly. i wish to god that the golden crown that i'll have to wear were red-hot steel and burned me straight through to the brain! i wish i could be anointed queen with deadly venom, not oil, and that i would die before anyone even had a chance to say, \"god save the queen!\"", "go, go, poor soul. i don't envy your position. if you want to make me happy, don't wish yourself harm."], ["no? why? the man i'm married to now came to me when he'd barely washed the blood off his hands from killing my first husband, that angel, as well as my husband's sainted father, whose corpse i was following to burial. i'm telling you, when i looked at richard's face, this is what i wished: \"i want you to be cursed for making me a widow so young. and when you get married, let sorrow haunt your bed. and i hope your wife if any woman is crazy enough to marry you is more miserable about the fact that you're alive as you have made me by killing my husband!\" and then what? before i even had time to repeat the curse, my woman's heart was taken captive by his sweet, slick words. i became the victim of my own curse. since i married him, i have not had one hour's sleep in his bed. every night i'm awakened by his dreams. it doesn't matter if i sleep, though. he hates me because of who my father is. he will, no doubt, get rid of me soon.", "poor dear, goodbye. i pity your situation.", "no more than i do yours.", "goodbye. i know you're unhappy with the glory of becoming queen.", "elizabeth and goodbye to you, the poor soul who has to leave that glory behind."], ["dorset go to richmond, and good luck. anne you go to richard. i hope good angels will protect you. queen elizabeth you take sanctuary in the abbey and think good thoughts for us. i will go to my grave, where i can look forward to peace and rest. i have witnessed eighty-odd years of sorrow; for each hour of joy i've experienced, i've suffered a full week of misery.", "wait. look back at the tower with me. please, you ancient building, take pity on those tender babes locked inside your walls by envious rivals! you are such a rough cradle for such little pretty ones. you are a rude, ragged nurse and an old, sullen playmate for such tender princes. please treat my babies well. i know i must look foolish saying goodbye to a building, but i'm aching with sorrow."], ["everyone stand aside. cousin buckingham.", "my gracious king.", "give me your hand.", "because of your advice and your help, i have a high position now. but will i wear these honors for only a day or will i enjoy them for a long time?", "let them last forever.", "oh buckingham, now i'm going to test to see if you're truly made of gold. young prince edward is still alive what do you think i'm going to say next?", "go on, my loving lord.", "why, buckingham, i say i want to be king.", "why, you are king, your highness.", "ha! am i king? i guess i am. but edward is still alive.", "true, noble prince."], ["oh, how bitter it is that edward the real \"true, noble prince\" should still be alive! cousin, you didn't used to be so thickheaded. shall i put it plainly? i want the bastards dead. and i want it done right away. what do you say? speak now and to the point.", "your grace can do whatever he wants.", "tut, tut, you've become rather icy. your friendliness toward me seems to be freezing over. tell me, do i have your consent to kill them?", "give me a little breathing space, my lord, a little pause to think. i'll let you know my answer shortly.", "the king is angry. see, he bites his lip.", "i only want to deal with stupid fools and careless boys. i have no use for people who look at me insightfully. ambitious buckingham grows much too circumspect. boy!", "my lord?", "do you know anyone who would kill someone for money?"], ["my lord, i know one unhappy gentleman who has more pride than money. money talks, and would very likely get him to do anything.", "what's his name?", "his name is tyrrel, my lord.", "i know the man a bit. go, bring him here, boy.", "the thoughtful, witty buckingham will no longer be privy to my innermost thoughts. has he held out for me for so long and without a moment's doubt only to suddenly need some \"breathing room\"? well, so be it.", "look who's here! what's the news with you?", "you should know, my loving lord, i've heard that the marquess dorset has fled to brittany, to the earl of richmond.", "come here, catesby. spread the rumor abroad that anne, my wife, is very sick. i will make sure she's kept out of view. and find a poverty stricken gentleman who i can marry straightaway to clarence's daughter. clarence's son is dull-witted, so i'm not worried about him. look at you, standing there in a stupor! i repeat, spread the rumor that anne, my wife, is sick and likely to die. hurry up because it's absolutely crucial that i destroy anything that may damage my position."], ["i must get married to my brother's . otherwise, my kingdom stands on glass. murdering her brothers and then marrying her isn't the most foolproof way to secure my position. but i'm steeped so deep in blood by now that one sin has to follow the next. i have no tears of pity for anyone.", "are you tyrrel?", "james tyrrel and your most obedient subject.", "are you indeed?", "test me, my blessed king.", "do you dare kill a friend of mine?", "yes, my lord, but i'd rather kill two enemies.", "well, that's what you get to do. two great enemies, in fact, enemies to my peace of mind. tyrrel, i mean those bastards in the tower.", "give me access to them, and soon you won't have to worry about them anymore.", "that's music to my ears. come here, tyrrel.", "by this token, you'll be admitted to their cell. get up and listen to me."], ["that's all there is to it. as soon as the deed is done, you will be in my favor and i will promote you.", "i'll do it right away.", "my lord, i have thought over the request you just made of me.", "well, it doesn't matter anymore. dorset has fled to the earl of richmond.", "i heard the news, my lord.", "stanley, richmond is your wife's son. get information from her.", "my lord, i'd want to have the gift you promised me on your honor: the earldom of hereford and all the possessions that go with it.", "stanley, pay attention to your wife's doings. if she sends any letters to richmond, you will be accountable to me for it.", "what do you say, your highness, about my just request?"], ["as i remember, henry the sixth prophesied that richmond would be king when richmond was only a foolish little boy. a king, perhaps", "my lord", "how is it that the prophet didn't tell me at the time that i would kill him?", "my lord, your promise of the earldom", "richmond! the last time i was in exeter, the mayor kindly showed me the castle there and called it \" .\" the name startled me because an irish poet once told me that i would die soon after seeing \"richmond.\"", "my lord!", "yes, what time is it?", "i'm reminding your grace what you promised me.", "well, but what time is it?", "it's almost ten o'clock.", "well, let it strike ten then.", "why \"let it strike\"?"], ["because you're like the lowborn fellow who strikes the bell you keep interrupting my thoughts. i am not in the giving mood today.", "well, then, let me know whether you will give me the earldom some other time.", "you're bothering me. i'm not in the mood.", "is this really happening? does he reward my dedicated service with such deep contempt? did i work to make him king for this? oh, let me remember what happened to hastings and hurry to while i still have my head on my shoulders!"], ["the tyrant's bloody request has been met. it was the most ruthless massacre this country has ever been guilty of. dighton and forrest, whom i hired to perform the butchery, are used to killing people, the bloody dogs. but they melted with tenderness and human compassion, weeping like children, when they described what they'd done. \"the tender babes lay like this,\" said dighton. \"like this,\" said forrest, \"with their innocent white arms around each other. their lips, like four red roses on a stalk, touched. a prayer book lay on their pillow, which\" said forrest, \"almost made me change my mind. but, oh, the devil\" there he stopped talking and dighton took up where he left off: \"we smothered the perfect, most sweet work of nature.\" the two men were both destroyed by remorse. they couldn't speak. so i left them to bring the news to the murderous king. and here he comes.", "here he comes. health to you, my king.", "kind tyrrel, will your news make me happy?"], ["if my doing what you told me to makes you happy, then be happy, because i did it.", "but did you see them dead?", "i did, my lord.", "and buried, noble tyrrel?", "the tower's chaplain has buried them, but to tell you the truth, i don't know where.", "tyrrel, come back shortly after dinner and tell me the details of their deaths. in the meantime, think about how i can do you good and give you what you want. see you soon.", "i humbly say goodbye.", "i've locked up clarence's son and matched his daughter with a poor fellow. edward's sons have been carried off by the angels and anne, my wife, has bid good night to the world. now i go, a jolly, thriving wooer, to marry my brother edward's young daughter, elizabeth, because i know richmond has his eye on her. he wants to win the crown by way of marrying her."], ["my lord!", "is the news good or bad that you enter without knocking?", "bad news, my lord. the bishop of ely has fled to richmond, and buckingham, backed by a hardy welsh army, is on the march. his army is growing.", "ely joining richmond troubles me more than buckingham and his quickly assembled army. come, i've heard that frightened analysis only serves to delay action, and delay can lead to ruin. so my method is going to be to move as quickly as fire. come, let's gather an army. the best strategy is to head right to the battlefield. when traitors challenge us to fight, it's best to act fast."], ["so now the good times have ripened and grown rotten. i've lurked in the shadows here to watch the downfall of my enemies. i've been watching the terrible prologue to a scene that i hope will prove dark and tragic. i'll head to france soon. it's time to hide, wretched margaret. who's coming?", "ah, my poor princes! ah, my tender babes, my flowers who didn't even get a chance to bloom. if your gentle souls are still flying in the air and have not yet landed where they will remain forever, hover around me with your airy wings and hear your mother's lament.", "hover about her and tell her she got what she deserved, with her children dead before their time.", "i've been crazed with so many miseries that my tongue has tired of lamenting and gone mute. edward plantagenet, why are you dead?", "one plantagenet pays for the other. one edward dies to pay a debt for the other edward who died."], ["will you abandon such gentle lambs, god, and throw them to the wolves? have you ever slept before while such a terrible deed was done?", "sure when my husband, holy , died and when my sweet son died.", "sight has gone blind, life is as dead as a ghost. this is a mournful scene it's a shame to the world, when someone like me, who should have died long ago, still lives. as a short summary and record of an unbearable life, i'll settle my restless bones on england's lawful ground , which broke the law when it got drunk on the blood of the innocent!", "oh, if only the earth would offer me not just a seat for mourning but a grave. then i would bury myself, not just rest my bones. oh, who has any reason to mourn except us?", "if the oldest grief is the most revered, then mine should have the most weight here. let my sorrow have the upper hand. if you can allow for comparison , consider your losses next to mine. i had an edward till a richard killed him, and i had a harry till a richard killed him. on your side, you had an edward till a richard killed him, and you had the young richard, york, till a richard killed him. so, i guess we're equal.", "i had a richard too namely, my husband and you killed him. i had my son rutland, and you helped kill him."], ["you had a clarence, too, and richard killed him. your womb let loose a hellhound that hunts us all to death. that dog, who was born with sharp teeth for lapping up the blood of lambs, who had teeth before he even had eyes, is the world's worst tyrant, making the eyes of a whole kingdom red with weeping. he destroys god's handiwork and will send us to our graves. oh righteous god, how can i thank you enough that this meat-eating mutt preys on his mother's children and forces her to join others in their grief!", "o harry's wife, do not triumph in my sorrow! with god as my witness, i swear i have wept for yours.", "bear with me. i am hungry for revenge, and now i plan to gorge myself on it. your son edward, who stabbed my son edward, is dead. to even the balance, your grandson edward is also dead, with young york thrown in because both your grandsons aren't equal to my one son. your clarence, who stabbed my edward, is also dead. and the audience to this insane play the adulterer hastings, as well as rivers, vaughan, and grey have been sent early to their graves. richard, a fiendish spy for hell itself, still lives, but only long enough to buy souls to send below. soon, very soon, he will meet his ghastly and well deserved end. when he dies, the earth will gape open, hell will burn hotter, devils will roar, and saints will pray to get him out of here fast. i pray that god ends his life before i die, so i can say, \"the dog is dead!\""], ["oh, you prophesied that the time would come when i would want your help in cursing that humpbacked spider, that hideous toad!", "back then, i called you \"a poor, imitation queen,\" a badly reproduced copy of what i was, a pretty prologue for the tragedy that was about to follow, a woman who was lifted high only to be hurled down to hell, a mother only teased with two beautiful children, who would soon die. i said you were a mere shadow of what a queen once was, a garish target to be aimed at again and again, an empty symbol of dignity without any substance, a mockery of a queen only there to fill in a role. and i was right, because where's your husband now? your brothers? your two sons? your source of joy? who kneels at your feet now and says, \"god save the queen?\" what noblemen are bowing and scraping to flatter you now? and where is your throng of followers? once you've laid out all of these losses, it's clear what's left. in place of a happy wife, there's a miserable widow. instead of a joyful mother, here's a woman who cries at the mention of her children. for one who bestows favors on others, here's one who has to beg for favors. instead of a queen, we have a poor woman with a crown of worries. she who mocked me now is mocked by me. she who once ordered everyone about is now obeyed by no one. your fortune has fallen. now you have only the memory of what you were, which tortures you when you consider what you've become. you once stole my position; now you get to have the grief that goes with it. now like an ox, you carry half my heavy burden of grief here, i'll give you the rest. farewell, york's wife. goodbye, queen of tragic misfortune. your english sorrows will make me smile in france."], ["you who are so skilled in cursing, stay awhile and teach me how to curse my enemies.", "don't sleep at night, and don't eat during the day. compare what you've lost with what you suffer now. remember your children as being sweeter than they actually were, and think of the man who killed them as worse than he is. making your loss greater makes the person who caused it worse. think like this all day, and you'll learn how to curse.", "my words are dull. enliven them with yours!", "your misery will make them sharp and piercing like mine.", "what good does it do to respond to catastrophe with a lot of words?", "words are a lot of useless breath, like lawyers who won't stop arguing for their sad clients, like a worthless inheritance, or like poor speech-makers who won't stop speaking. but give words a chance. though they won't help in any other way, at least they make us feel better.", "if that's true, then don't be tongue-tied. come with me, and let's smother my fiendish son who smothered your two sweet sons in bitter words.", "i hear his battle drums. don't stint on your words."], ["who's blocking the way?", "the woman who might have blocked you from all the murders you've committed by strangling you in her cursed womb.", "are you hiding your forehead with a golden crown, when, if there was any justice in this world, it should be branded with the murders you committed your slaughter of the prince who held that crown, and of my sons and my brothers? tell me, you villainous lowlife, where are my children?", "you toad, where is your brother clarence and his son, little ned plantagenet?", "where are the noble hastings, rivers, vaughan, grey?", "where is kind hastings?", "play, trumpets! a call to arms, drums! don't let the heavens hear these chattery women abuse the lord's anointed king. play, i say!", "either be calm and polite or i'll drown you out with the music of war.", "are you my son?"], ["yes, i thank god, my father, and yourself.", "then patiently listen to my impatience.", "madam, i'm a bit like you in that i can't tolerate a tone of disapproval.", "oh, let me speak!", "go ahead, but i won't listen.", "i'll be gentle and mild.", "and brief, good mother i'm in a hurry.", "are you that impatient? god knows i waited for you in anguish, pain, and agony when i gave birth to you.", "and didn't i finally arrive to comfort you?", "no, by god, you know perfectly well you arrived on earth to make it my hell. your birth was incredibly painful; you were a fussy and difficult baby; as a schoolboy, you were frightening, wild, furious, and caused me despair; as a young man, you were daring, bold, and enterprising, and in your maturity, you have been haughty, bloody, and treacherous both more mild and more harmful than before. so, what hour of comfort have i ever had in your company? name one."], ["i guess none except hour, who once invited you to have breakfast without me. if i be such a disgrace in your eyes, let me march on and not offend you. strike up the band!", "please, listen to me.", "you're too bitter.", "just listen this once. i'll never speak to you again.", "so be it.", "either you will die as you should, before you've had a chance to win this battle, or will die from grief and age and never look upon your face again. so, take with you my heaviest curse, which i hope wears you out in battle even more than your heavy suit of armor will. i pray that the little souls of edward's children will whisper to your enemies and promise them success and victory. you are violent, and your end will be violent. your life was shameful, and let your death be, too."], ["though i have far more reason, i don't have as much energy to curse you. but i say amen to everything she said.", "wait, madam. i need to speak a word with you.", "i have no more royal sons for you to murder. as for my daughters, richard, they will become praying nuns, not weeping queens. so don't aim at them.", "you have a daughter named elizabeth, who is virtuous and beautiful, aristocratic and full of grace.", "and does she have to die for this? oh, let her live, and i'll ruin her manners and her beauty. so that she may live, i'll say i cheated on edward and that she is not really his child.", "don't wrong her birth. she has royal blood.", "to save her life, i'll say she doesn't.", "her life is only safe if she's really of royal blood.", "yes, as safe as her brothers' lives were.", "they were born under unlucky stars.", "the stars weren't the problem. bad friends were.", "you can't escape a bad destiny."], ["true, when a king who defies god is choosing that destiny. my children would have enjoyed a better death if god had blessed you with a purer life.", "you speak as if had killed my nephews.", "nephews, indeed, cheated by their uncle of comfort, kingdom, relatives, freedom, and life. whichever hand literally stabbed their tender hearts, you're the one who gave the order. no doubt the murderous knife was blunt till it was sharpened on your stony heart you reveled in my lambs' bloody guts. but constant expression of wild grief will only make it tame, so i'm not going to say any more about my boys until i've gouged your eyes out with my bare hands. like a sailboat that has lost its sails, i will throw myself on your rocky bosom and get torn to pieces.", "madam, if i do as well as i think i'm going to do in these dangerous, violent wars, you and your relatives will have more good at my hands than you've ever had bad!", "what good does heaven have in store that can do me any good now?", "the advancement of your children, noble lady.", "advancement to some scaffold, to lose their heads.", "no, advancement to the dignity and height of honor, to a high, imperial kind of glory."], ["flatter me in my mourning: tell me what dignity or honor you could possible bring to any child of mine?", "the dignity of everything i own. in fact, i will give a child of yours everything plus myself, provided you forget the wrongs you imagine i have done to you.", "well, explain but do it fast so that your puny store of kindness isn't used up by talking about it.", "then know that from my soul i love your daughter.", "i believe it.", "what do you believe?", "that you love my daughter to spite your soul. that's the way you loved my brothers. and that's the way i thank you for it.", "don't be so quick to twist my meaning. i mean that i love your daughter all my soul. i intend to make her queen of england.", "tell me, who will be the king?", "the one who makes her queen, of course. who else should it be?", "what, you?", "yes, exactly. me. what do you think, madam?"], ["how would you woo her?", "that's what i want to find out from you, who knows her best.", "and you learn from me?", "madam, with all my heart.", "okay, then. do this: send her a pair of bleeding hearts. make clear they come from the man who killed her brothers. write \"edward\" and \"york\" on them. that will get her to weep. then present her with a handkerchief, like the one margaret gave your father, which was steeped in his son rutland's blood. tell her this handkerchief sopped up the blood of her sweet brother's body and urge her to dry her weeping eyes with it. if this encouragement doesn't move her to love you, send her a description of your other noble deeds. tell her how you secretly dispensed with her uncle clarence, her uncle rivers, and, for her sake, her good aunt anne.", "come, come, you're making fun of me. this is not the way to win your daughter.", "there isn't any other way, unless you took on another form and became someone else.", "but suppose i did all the things you named out of love for her.", "then she has no choice but to hate you, as you purchased her love with murder."], ["whatever has already been done can't be undone now. men act imprudently sometimes, then realize their mistakes when they have time to think about them. if i took the kingdom from your sons, i'll give it to your daughter to make up for it. if i have killed your children, i will have children with your daughter. a grandmother is loved hardly less than a mother is. your grandchildren will be just one step removed from your own children they share your character, your blood, and require the same effort minus that one night of labor, like that which you suffered through for your own daughter. your children caused you trouble in your youth, but mine will bring you comfort in your old age. the only loss you've had is that your son was not king. because of that loss, your daughter will be queen. i can't make up for everything that i'd like to, so accept such kindness as i can offer. your son dorset, who fled in fear to join an army in france against me, could come home to high promotions and great dignity. the king who calls your beautiful daughter \"wife\" will call dorset \"brother.\" and you will be the mother to a king again, with all the miseries of unhappy times not just repaired, but also improved. indeed, we have many good days to look forward to! the tears you have shed will be transformed into pearls. your happiness will be like a loan that has grown through interest to ten times its original size. go, then, mother, to your daughter."], ["give her the benefit of your experience, and prepare her to hear me court her. make her aspire to be queen. tell the princess about the sweet, silent hours of joy there are in marriage. and when my army has chastised the petty rebel, that stupid buckingham, i will return wreathed in victory crowns and lead your daughter to a conqueror's bed. she will be the only victor over my triumphs. she will be the ruler of a caesar.", "what should i say to her? that her father's brother wants to be her husband? or should i say it's her uncle? or should i describe you as the one who killed her brothers and her uncles? how can i describe you that will make you appeal to the young woman and will also agree with god, the law, my honor, and her feelings?", "claim fair england's peace depends on this alliance.", "she will purchase that peace with an everlasting war.", "tell her that the king, who has the power to command people, asks her.", "he asks her to do what god .", "say she will be a high and mighty queen.", "only to watch that title become worthless, as her mother has.", "say i will love her everlastingly."], ["but how long will \"ever\" last?", "until her beautiful life's end.", "but how long will her beautiful life last?", "as long as heaven and nature extend it.", "as long as hell and richard want it.", "tell her that i, her king, am her lowly subject.", "but she, your subject, hates such a king.", "be eloquent on my behalf.", "an honest tale succeeds best when it is told simply.", "then tell her my loving story in simple terms.", "you can't tell a story simply when it's a lie.", "your answers are too shallow and too hasty.", "oh no, my reasons are deep and as permanent as death. they're buried as deep as my poor infants in their grave.", "don't harp on that point, madam it's past.", "i will harp on it till my heartstrings break.", "now, by st. george, my knighthood, and my crown", "the first you profaned, the second you dishonored, and the third you stole."], ["i swear", "by nothing, because this is no oath. st. george loses his holiness once have sworn by him; you've ruined the emblem of the knighthood, and the crown lost its kingly glory once you stole it. if you want me to believe something you'll swear to, then swear by something you haven't wronged.", "then, by myself", "you've misused yourself.", "now, by the world", "it's full of your ugly wrongdoings.", "by my father's death", "your life has dishonored his death.", "why then, by god", "you wrong god most of all. if you had been afraid to break an oath with him, you wouldn't have ruined the united front the king, my husband, created before he died, and you wouldn't have killed my brothers. if you had been afraid to break an oath with him, the crown you are currently wearing would have graced the head of my child, and both princes would still be alive, not preyed on by worms. what can you swear by now?"], ["by the future.", "you've already wronged that by what you did in the past. i myself have many tears to cry in the time to come, because of what you've done. there are children living whose fathers you have slaughtered. when they are grown, they will wail about a childhood in which no one watched out for them. there are parents living whose children you have butchered; they are now old withered plants who will moan over their losses as they grow old. don't swear by the future, because you've ruined it before it has even arrived.", "may i only do well in these dangerous battles if my intention to repent and prosper is sincere! let me destroy myself, let heaven and destiny deprive me of happy hours, let day remain dark and night sleepless, and let me have nothing but terrible luck if i do not love with a pure heart, clean devotion, and holy thoughts your beautiful royal daughter. my happiness and yours lie in her. if i do not win her, death, desolation, and decay will descend on this land and on me, you, herself, and many a christian soul. ruin cannot be avoided unless i marry her. it be avoided unless i marry her. therefore, good mother i must call you that advocate for me. plead with your daughter about what i will be, not what i have been. don't talk about my just desserts but about what i deserve. tell her how necessary this marriage is at this time, and don't be small-minded about such important plans."], ["shall i be tempted by the devil?", "yes, if the devil tempts you to do good.", "shall i forget the wrongs you've done to me so that i can be the mother of a king again?", "yes, if your memories do you no good.", "yet you killed my children.", "but in your daughter's womb i will bury them. in that rich nest they shall grow again, to console you.", "should i go convince my daughter to marry you?", "and be a happy mother by doing so.", "i'm going. write to me very soon and i'll let you know what she thinks.", "give her a kiss from me, her true love. and so, goodbye.", "weak-willed fool! shallow, fickle woman!", "hello! what's the news?"], ["my noble king, a powerful fleet of ships sails on the western coast. many former friends of ours have gathered to meet the fleet and aren't willing to beat it back. word is that richmond is the navy's admiral. the ships are drifting off the coast, sails unfurled, only waiting for buckingham to help them come ashore.", "someone who can ride fast, go to the duke of . you go, ratcliffe, or catesby. where is catesby?", "here, my good lord.", "catesby, fly to the duke.", "i will my lord, as fast as i can.", "ratcliffe, come here. ride to salisbury. when you get there catesby stupid, distracted rascal, why are you still standing there? why haven't you left for the duke's?", "first, mighty king, tell me what you want me to tell him.", "oh, right, good catesby. tell him to gather together the greatest army he can muster in a hurry and meet me right away at salisbury.", "i'm off."], ["what would you like me to do at salisbury?", "why, what is there to do before i get there?", "your highness just told me that i should ride there before you.", "i changed my mind.", "stanley, what news do you have?", "nothing that you want to hear, my lord, but nothing so bad that i can't mention it.", "well, how nice, a riddle! neither good nor bad. why do you go around in circles when you could get to the point? once again, what's the news?", "richmond is sailing on the sea.", "let him sink there so the sea will cover him! lily-livered coward, what's he doing there?", "i don't know, mighty king. i can only guess.", "well, what do you guess?", "that, stirred up by dorset, buckingham, and morton, he's coming to england to claim the crown."], ["is the throne empty? is the army without a leader? is the king dead, the empire dispossessed? what heir of the york family is there alive other than myself? and who is england's king but an heir of the great york? therefore, tell me, what is he doing at sea?", "unless it's what i said, your majesty, i have no idea.", "unless he's coming to be your leader you can't guess why the coming? you plan to revolt and join him, i'm afraid.", "no, mighty king, do not distrust me.", "where is your army, then, to beat him back? where are your tenants and your followers? aren't they at this very moment on the western shore helping the rebels land safely from their ships?", "no, my good lord, my friends are in the north.", "then they're cold friends to me. what are they doing in the north when they should be in the west serving their king?", "they haven't been commanded to go to the west, mighty king. if your majesty would like, i'll muster up my friends and meet you wherever and whenever you like.", "yes, you want to go join richmond. but i'm not going to trust you."], ["most mighty sovereign, you have no reason to doubt my friendship. i was never disloyal, and i never will be.", "then go gather your men, but leave behind your son, george stanley. make sure your faith is firm, or he has little chance of keeping his head.", "treat him as my loyalty toward you calls for.", "my noble king, my friends have informed me that sir edward courtney and his brother, the haughty bishop of exeter, are now in , where they have assembled an army.", "my king, the guildfords in have armed themselves, and every hour new associates flock to their aid, and their army increases.", "my lord, the duke of buckingham's army", "enough, you ! do you have nothing but songs of death? third messenger take that until you bring me better news."], ["the news i have to tell your majesty is that buckingham's army has dispersed from sudden floods and heavy rainfall. buckingham himself has wandered away alone to who knows where.", "i beg your pardon. here's some money to make up for that blow i gave you. has any intelligent friend of ours offered a reward to whoever catches the traitor?", "yes, your highness.", "it's been reported that sir thomas lovell and lord marquess dorset have assembled an army in , my lord. but i bring your grace this comfort: a storm has dispersed the navy from brittany. and richmond, who is in e, sent a boat to shore to ask the men on the banks if they were on his side, yes or no. they said they were with buckingham. richmond didn't trust them. he hoisted sail again and sailed back to brittany.", "let's keep marching since we're prepared to fight. even if we don't fight foreign enemies, we'll beat down these rebels at home."], ["your majesty, the duke of buckingham has been captured that's the best news. the fact that the earl of richmond has landed in with a mighty army is less good news, but it must be told.", "away toward salisbury! while we're talking here, a royal battle could be won and lost. someone deliver the order that buckingham be brought to salisbury. everyone else, march on with me."], ["sir christopher, relay this message to richmond: my son george stanley is penned up in the bloody boar's sty. if i revolt, off goes young george's head. my fear of that prevents me from helping richmond at this time. but, tell me, where is the noble richmond now?", "at pembroke, or at harfordwest in wales.", "which noblemen have joined him?", "sir walter herbert, a renowned soldier; sir gilbert talbot; sir william stanley; oxford; the highly feared pembroke; sir james blunt; rice ap thomas, with a valiant crew; and many other famous and powerful noblemen. they plan to head straight to london, assuming they don't encounter any resistance on the way.", "return to your lord. give him my best regards. tell him the queen has given her heartfelt consent to his marriage to her daughter, elizabeth. and these letters will let him know what my thinking is. goodbye, and take care."], ["won't king richard let me speak with him?", "no, my good lord. so be calm.", "hastings and edward's children, rivers and grey, holy king henry and your fine son edward, vaughan, and all who have died from underhanded, corrupt, fiendish injustice, if your angry souls are witnessing this moment through the clouds, enjoy the revenge laugh at my ruin! this is day, fellows, isn't it?", "it is, my lord.", "why, then, it's my body's doomsday. today i'm going to get what i said i wished would happen to me if i was ever false to king edward's children or his wife's allies. this is the day i'm going to get what i wished for when i wished that the person i most trusted would betray me. this, this all-souls' day, is my just desserts. i tried to play games with god, and he turned my fake prayer on my head, giving me for real what i'd asked for as a joke."], ["this is how god forces wicked men to turn their swords against themselves. margaret's curse has come true. \"when richard has split your heart in two with grief,\" she said, \"you'll know that margaret was a prophetess.\" come, sirs, bring me to this block of shame. i have done wrong, so i will suffer wrong. i have been blamed because i deserved to be."], ["fellow soldiers and my loyal friends suffering under that tyrant richard, we have marched all the way to the center of england without encountering any opposition. and now we receive encouraging news from my stepfather stanley: richard that violent, greedy boar who roots through your summer fields and ripening vines, guzzles your warm blood, and makes his trough in your disemboweled bellies is now near the town of leicester, only one day's march from us here in . in god's name, let's continue on in high spirits, my courageous friends. our aim is to achieve everlasting peace from this one violent war.", "every man's conscience is a thousand swords against this murderer.", "i suspect his friends will join us.", "he has no friends except those who are too afraid to defy him. in his greatest need, even they will desert him.", "all to our advantage. so, in god's name, let's march. hope with good cause is swift; it flies as fast as a swallow. it turns kings into gods and men of lower rank into kings."], ["let's pitch our tents right here in bosworth field. my lord of surrey, why do you look so sad?", "my heart is ten times lighter than my looks.", "my lord of norfolk", "here, most gracious king.", "norfolk, we're going to have a few blows, right?", "we've got to give them and take them, my lord.", "put my tent up! i'll lie here tonight. but where will i lie tomorrow? well, it doesn't matter. does anyone know the number of the enemy's troops?", "six or seven thousand, at most.", "why, our troops amount to three times that. besides, the king's name is a tower of strength; the opposition doesn't have that advantage. put up my tent! come, noble gentlemen, let us look at our battle plan and get some experienced officers to help us figure out the best strategy. let's be disciplined and not delay, because tomorrow is a busy day."], ["the sunset was golden and left a bright track in the sky, which indicates that tomorrow will be a good day. sir william brandon, you will carry my flag. bring some ink and paper to my tent, and i'll draw a model of our battle, appoint each leader to his particular command, and carefully divide up our small army. my lord of oxford, you, sir william brandon, and you, sir walter herbert, are going to stay with me. the earl of pembroke will stick with his regiment. good captain blunt, tell the earl goodnight from me, and tell him that by two in the morning i would like him to visit my tent. one more thing before you go, blunt where is lord stanley lodging, do you know?", "unless i've mistaken his battle flags, which i'm sure i haven't, his regiment lies at least half a mile south of the king's mighty army.", "if it's possible to do this without putting yourself in danger, dear captain blunt, say goodnight to him from me and give him this important note.", "upon my life, my lord, i'll do it. have a restful night!"], ["good night, dear captain blunt.", "come, gentlemen, let's discuss tomorrow's action in my tent. the night air is too raw and cold for us to stay outdoors.", "what time is it?", "it's dinnertime, my lord. it's nine o'clock.", "i'm not going to eat dinner tonight. give me some ink and paper. is the visor of my helmet working better now? and has my armor been put in my tent?", "yes, my lord. everything's ready.", "my good man norfolk, hurry to your post. be careful whom you choose as guards make sure they're trustworthy.", "i'm off, my lord.", "get up early tomorrow at the sound of the lark noble norfolk.", "i will, my lord.", "catesby."], ["yes, my lord?", "send a junior officer to stanley's regiment to tell stanley to bring his men here before sunrise if he wants to see his son george alive.", "get me some wine. get a soldier to stand watch outside my tent. saddle my white horse surrey for battle tomorrow. make sure the shafts of my lances are solid, but not too heavy. ratcliffe!", "yes, my lord?", "did you see the gloomy lord northumberland?", "thomas, the earl of surrey, and he were moving from troop to troop around twilight cheering up the soldiers.", "good, i'm satisfied. give me some wine i don't feel as energetic as i used to. set it down. is my ink and paper ready?", "it is, my lord.", "make sure my guard is on duty and leave me alone. ratcliffe, around midnight come to my tent and help me put on my armor. now leave me alone, as i said."], ["let fortune and victory be yours!", "i wish you all the comfort that such a dark night as this can offer, noble father-in-law. tell me, how is my mother?", "your mother sends her blessings. she prays continually on your behalf. enough about that morning will be here soon. to be brief as the occasion requires prepare to fight early in the morning, when your future will be decided. i can't do everything i want to, but i'll help you as well as i can. but i can't be too obvious about being on your side without risking the life of your stepbrother, young george. if i'm seen helping you, george will be killed right in front of my eyes. farewell. the lack of time and the risk i'm under will have to keep us from bonding and catching up on each other's news the way we usually would after not seeing each other for so long. i hope we have the time some day! again, goodbye. be brave and do well!", "good lords, escort him to his regiment. i'm going to try to take a nap despite my racing thoughts so that exhaustion won't get the better of me tomorrow, when i'll need to ride as if my horse had wings. again, good night, kind lords and gentlemen."], ["oh god, whose side i think i'm fighting on, look kindly on my forces. fuel them with dangerous fury, so they can crush the enemy. make us your agents of revenge, so we can praise you when we're victorious! before i fall asleep, i entrust my soul to you. defend me, god, both when i'm asleep and when i'm awake. .", "richard i will weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow. remember how you stabbed me at tewksbury, when i was just a young man. despair, and die! richmond be cheerful, richmond butchered princes fight for you. i, king henry's son, will provide you with comfort.", "richard when i was still alive, you punctured my body, the body of god's blessed king, full of holes. remember the tower and me there. despair, and die! harry the sixth commands you to despair and die! richmond because you are virtuous and holy, you must be the conqueror! harry, who prophesied that you would be king, comforts you in your sleep: live and prosper!"], ["richard i hope i weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow! it's me, drowned to death in a nauseating barrel of wine. it's me, poor clarence, whom you betrayed to death! tomorrow in battle, think of me and drop your useless sword. despair, and die! richmond offspring of the house of lancaster, the wronged heirs of york pray for you. good angels protect your fight! live and prosper!", "richard i will weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow i, rivers, who died at pomfret. despair, and die!", "richard think about grey, and despair!", "richard think about vaughan, and drop your lance from fear and guilt. despair, and die!", "richmond awaken, and have faith that the wrongs richard carries in his heart will defeat him! awaken, and win the day!"], ["richard dream about your nephews, smothered in the tower. let us rest in your heart as heavily as lead, richard, and drag you down to ruin, shame, and death! your nephews' souls command that you despair and die! richmond sleep, richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy. good angels will protect you from the boar's attacks! live, and give birth to a whole, happy race of kings! edward's unlucky sons want you to flourish.", "richard you violent, guilty man, wake up full of guilt and end your days in a bloody battle! think about lord hastings. despair, and die! richmond quiet untroubled soul, wake up! arm yourself, fight, and win for beautiful england's sake!", "richard richard, your wife, your wretched wife, anne, who never enjoyed a quiet hour of sleep with you, now fills your sleep with disturbing thoughts. tomorrow in battle think of me and fall on your sword: despair, and die! richmond you quiet soul, sleep a quiet sleep. dream of success and happy victory. your enemy's wife is praying for you."], ["richard i was the first to help you to the crown and the last to feel the effects of your tyranny. think of buckingham when you're fighting tomorrow, and die terrified of the sins you've committed! tonight, dream of bloody deeds and death. tomorrow, when you lose heart, fall into despair and then death. richmond i died before i could help you as i was hoping to. but be cheerful and don't worry. god and good angels fight on your side, and richard will fall at the height of his false pride.", "give me another horse! bandage my wounds! have mercy, jesus! wait, i was only dreaming. oh cowardly conscience, how you're torturing me! the candles burn blue that means it's the dead of night. i'm sweating and trembling with fear. but what am i afraid of? myself? there's no one else here. richard loves richard, that is, there's just me and myself here. is there a murderer here? no. yes, i am. then run away. what, from myself? yes, to avoid taking revenge on myself. unfortunately, i love myself. why? did i do anything good to myself? oh, no. alas, i hate myself instead, because of the hateful deeds i've committed. i am a villain. but i'm lying; i'm not a villain. fool, speak well of yourself. fool, do not flatter yourself."], ["give me another horse! bandage my wounds! have mercy, jesus! wait, i was only dreaming. oh cowardly conscience, how you're torturing me! the candles burn blue that means it's the dead of night. i'm sweating and trembling with fear. but what am i afraid of? myself? there's no one else here. richard loves richard, that is, there's just me and myself here. is there a murderer here? no. yes, i am. then run away. what, from myself? yes, to avoid taking revenge on myself. unfortunately, i love myself. why? did i do anything good to myself? oh, no. alas, i hate myself instead, because of the hateful deeds i've committed. i am a villain. but i'm lying; i'm not a villain. fool, speak well of yourself. fool, do not flatter yourself.", "my lord.", "damn it, who's there?", "ratcliffe, my lord, it's me. the rooster has already crowed twice. your friends are up and buckling on their armor.", "oh ratcliffe, i had a terrifying dream! what do you think, will my friends prove loyal?", "no doubt, my lord.", "oh ratcliffe, i'm afraid, i'm afraid", "no, my good lord, don't be afraid of dreams."], ["by st. paul, ghosts have struck more terror in my soul tonight than ten thousand of worthless richmond's soldiers could, dressed up in their most sword-proof armor. it's not yet daylight. come with me; i'll spy under the tents to see if any of my own people plan to desert me.", "good morning, richmond.", "pardon me, lords and gentlemen who stayed awake. you've caught me oversleeping.", "how did you sleep, my lord?", "since you left, i've been enjoying the sweetest sleep and most promising dreams i've ever had, my lords. i dreamed the souls of the people richard murdered came to my tent and promised me victory. i tell you, i feel very jolly remembering such a beautiful dream. how late is it, lords?", "it's almost four.", "why, then, it's time to put on my armor and instruct the troops. i can't tell you much right now, loyal countrymen, because we don't have time. but know this:"], ["we have god and a good cause on our side. the prayers of saints and those that richard wronged support us like high-walled fortresses. other than richard, even those whom we fight against would rather we won. because who is this man they follow? truly, gentlemen, a violent tyrant and a murderer, who rose to his high position by shedding blood and kept the position the same way. he rose to the top by means of others and then slaughtered them. he's like a worthless stone, who only seems like a valuable gem because he's on the throne, where he doesn't belong. he has always been god's enemy. and when you fight god's enemy, god will protect you. if you struggle to bring down a tyrant, you will sleep peacefully when the tyrant is killed. when you fight against your country's enemies, you will be paid for your efforts with your country's wealth. if you fight to protect your wives, your wives will welcome you home as conquerors. when you free your children from the sword, your grandchildren will repay you in your old age. so, in the name of god and all the good that will come of this , march with your flags high and draw your swords. as for me, if i fail, the only ransom i will offer the enemy is my corpse. but if i succeed, every one of you will share in the profit. play boldly and cheerfully, drummers and trumpeters. here's to god and saint george! to richmond and victory!"], ["what did northumberland say about richmond?", "that he was never trained as a soldier.", "that's true. and what did surrey say to that?", "he smiled and said, \"the better for us.\"", "he's right, and that's how it is.", "read the time there. give me an almanac. did anyone see the sun today?", "i didn't, my lord.", "then it refuses to shine. according to this almanac, it should have risen an hour ago. it'll be a black day for somebody today. ratcliffe!", "my lord?", "the sun will not appear today. the sky frowns and scowls on our army. i wish there wasn't so much dew on the ground. so, the sun won't shine today! well, why should that be worse for me than it is for richmond? the same heaven that's frowning on me looks gloomily on him."], ["get ready, my lord. the enemy is making its appearance on the battlefield.", "hurry, hurry prepare my horse. tell lord stanley to bring his army. i will lead my soldiers to the field and the battle formation will be like this: the vanguard will extend in a line that is equal parts horsemen and foot soldiers. the archers will stay in the middle. john duke of norfolk and thomas earl of surrey will lead the horsemen and foot soldiers. i'll follow in the center of the troop formation, which i'll defend with my best horse, and with saint george on my side, as well! what do you think, norfolk?", "a good plan, warrior king. i found this pinned to my tent this morning.", null, "\"jackie of norfolk, don't be too bold, for dick your master has been betrayed.\" something the enemy devised. go, gentleman, every man to his command. don't let babbling dreams frighten us conscience is just a word that cowards use to intimidate the strong. the strong fight we put on will be our conscience, our swords will be our law."], ["march on, be brave in battle, and let's go pell-mell to heaven, if not hand in hand to hell. what more can i say? remember who you're dealing with a random bunch of bums, rascals, runaways, breton scum, and peasant hangers-on whom an overcrowded nation vomits out to populate every desperate, sure-to-fail enterprise. you have been sleeping soundly, and they bring unrest. you own land they want to steal. those of you who are blessed with beautiful wives, they want to defile them. and who's leading them but an inconsequential fellow who for the longest time lived in brittany at his mother's expense? a girly man, a man who never in his life felt more cold than seeps into one's boots in the snow? let's send these stragglers back over the sea. let's whip these arrogant relics of france these starving beggars, tired of their lives, who would have hanged themselves, poor rats, if it weren't for this foolish enterprise they've been dreaming about back to france. if we're going to be conquered, let men conquer us, and not these french bastards whom our forefathers already beat, thrashed, and pummeled on their own turf, and shamed them forever in the history books. should these people enjoy our lands? sleep with our wives? rape our daughters?", "listen! i hear their drums. fight, gentlemen of england! fight, brave landlords! draw your bows all the way back, archers! spur your proud horses hard, horsemen, and ride in blood. startle even the sky with the sound of your lances cracking."], ["what does lord stanley say? will he bring his army?", "my lord, he refuses to come.", "off with his son george's head!", "my lord, the enemy has already passed the marsh. let george stanley die after the battle.", "a thousand hearts beat in my chest. let's advance our flags, set upon our enemies, and have our ancient saint of courage, good saint george, inspire us with the fury of fiery dragons! let's go! victory is with us."], ["help, my lord of norfolk, help, help! the king performs more wonders than seem humanly possible, challenging every enemy he sees. his horse is killed, so he's fighting on foot, risking his life to search out richmond. help, dear lord, or the battle will be lost!", "a horse, a horse, i'd give my kingdom for a horse!", "get off the field, my lord. i'll find you another horse.", "peasant, i have gambled my life on this one throw of the dice, and i'm willing to take what comes. i think there are six richmonds on the field. i've killed five that looked like him, anyway. a horse, a horse! i'd give my kingdom for a horse!"], ["god and your work be praised, victorious friends. the day is ours. the bloody dog is dead.", "courageous richmond, you fought well. here, i've taken back the stolen crown from that violent lowlife so it can grace your brows. wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.", "great god of heaven, say amen to all this! but, tell me, is young george stanley alive?", "he is, my lord, and safe in leicester, where, if you'd like, we can retreat to.", "which gentlemen on each side have been killed?", "john duke of norfolk, walter lord ferrers, sir robert brakenbury, and sir william brandon.", "bury them in a manner appropriate to their noble births. proclaim that i'll pardon the soldiers who fled if they will return and submit to my rule. as i vowed, i will unite the york and lancaster families."], ["heaven, for a long time you have frowned upon the hatred between them. smile, then, on this beautiful union. what traitor hears me and doesn't say amen? england has long been so crazy that she was willing to hurt herself, brothers blindly shed their brothers' blood, fathers rashly slaughtered their own sons, sons were forced to butcher their fathers. all this further divided the two families, which were already so badly divided. now let richmond and elizabeth, the true heirs of each royal house, be joined together! and let their heirs, if you are willing, god, enrich the future with peace and plenty! gracious lord, blunt the swords of those traitors who mean to tear poor england apart again! let those who would mar this fair land's peace with treason die before they can enjoy its wealth. civil wounds now can heal, and peace can live again. so that england may live a long life like this, let god say amen!"]], [["in the beautiful city of verona, where our story takes place, a long-standing hatred between two families erupts into new violence, and citizens stain their hands with the blood of their fellow citizens. two unlucky children of these enemy families become lovers and commit suicide. their unfortunate deaths put an end to their parents' feud. for the next two hours, we will watch the story of their doomed love and their parents' anger, which nothing but the children's deaths could stop. if you listen to us patiently, we'll make up for everything we've left out in this prologue onstage."], ["gregory, i swear, we can't let them humiliate us. we won't take their garbage.", "sampson no, because then we'd be garbagemen.", "what i mean is, if they make us angry we'll pull out our swords.", "maybe you should focus on pulling yourself out of trouble, sampson.", "i hit hard when i'm angry.", "but it's hard to make you .", "one of those dogs from the montague house can make me angry.", "angry enough to run away. you won't stand and fight.", "a dog from that house will make me angry enough to take a stand. if i pass one of them on the street, i'll take the side closer to the wall and let him walk in the gutter."], ["that means you're the weak one, because weaklings get pushed up against the wall.", "you're right. that's why girls get pushed up against walls they're weak. so what i'll do is push the montague men into the street and the montague women up against the wall.", "the fight is between our masters, and we men who work for them.", "it's all the same. i'll be a harsh master to them. after i fight the men, i'll be nice to the women i'll cut off their heads.", "cut off their heads? you mean their ?", "cut off their heads, take their maidenheads whatever. take my remark in whichever sense you like.", "the women you rape are the ones who'll have to \"sense\" it.", "they'll feel me as long as i can keep an erection. everybody knows i'm a nice piece of flesh.", "it's a good thing you're not a piece of fish. you're like salted fish.", "pull out your tool now. these guys are from the house of montague.", "i have my naked sword out. fight, i'll back you up."], ["how will you back me up by turning your back and running away?", "don't worry about me.", "no, really. i worried about you!", "let's not break the law by starting a fight. let them start something.", "i'll frown at them as they pass by, and they can react however they want.", "you mean however they dare. i'll bite my thumb at them. that's an insult, and if they let me get away with it they'll be dishonored. sampson", "hey, are you biting your thumb at us?", "i'm biting my thumb.", "are you biting your thumb at us?", "( gregory) is the law on our side if i say yes?", "sampson no.", "( abram) no, sir, i'm not biting my thumb at you, but i am biting my thumb.", "are you trying to start a fight?", "start a fight? no, sir."], ["if you want to fight, i'm your man. my employer is as good as yours.", "but he's not better than mine.", "well then.", "sampson say \"better.\" here comes one of my employer's relatives.", "abram yes, \"better,\" sir.", "you lie.", "pull out your swords, if you're men. gregory, remember how to slash.", "( ) break it up, you fools. put your swords away. you don't know what you're doing.", "what? you've pulled out your sword to fight with these worthless servants? turn around, benvolio, and look at the man who's going to kill you."], ["i'm only trying to keep the peace. either put away your sword or use it to help me stop this fight.", "what? you take out your sword and then talk about peace? i hate the word peace like i hate hell, all montagues, and you. let's go at it, coward!", "use your clubs and spears! hit them! beat them down! down with the capulets! down with the montagues!", "what's this noise? give me my long sword! come on!", "a crutch, you need a crutch why are you asking for a sword?", "i want my sword. old montague is here, and he's waving his sword around just to make me mad.", "capulet, you villain! don't stop me. let me go.", "you're not taking one step toward an enemy."], ["you rebels! enemies of the peace! men who turn their weapons against their own neighbors they won't listen to me? you there! you men, you beasts, who satisfy your anger with fountains of each others' blood! i'll have you tortured if you don't put down your swords and listen to your angry prince. montague capulet three times now riots have broken out in this city, all because of a casual word from you, old capulet and montague. three times the peace has been disturbed in our streets, and verona's old citizens have had to take off their dress clothes and pick up rusty old spears to part you. if you ever cause a disturbance on our streets again, you'll pay for it with your lives. everyone else, go away for now. ( capulet) you, capulet, come with me montague) montague, this afternoon come to old free-town, the court where i deliver judgments, and i'll tell you what else i want from you. as for the rest of you, i'll say this once more: go away or be put to death.", "who started this old fight up again? speak, nephew. were you here when it started?"], ["your servants were fighting your enemy's servants before i got here. i drew my sword to part them. right then, that hothead tybalt showed up with his sword ready. he taunted me and waved his sword around, making the air hiss. as we were trading blows, more and more people showed up to join the fight, until the prince came and broke everyone up.", "oh, where's romeo? have you seen him today? i'm glad he wasn't here for this fight.", "madam, i had a lot on my mind an hour before dawn this morning, so i went for a walk. underneath the sycamore grove that grows on the west side of the city, i saw your son taking an early-morning walk. i headed toward him, but he saw me coming and hid in the woods. i thought he must be feeling the same way i was wanting to be alone and tired of his own company. i figured he was avoiding me, and i was perfectly happy to leave him alone and keep to myself.", "he's been seen there many mornings, crying tears that add drops to the morning dew and making a cloudy day cloudier with his sighs. but as soon as the sun rises in the east, my sad son comes home to escape the light."], ["he locks himself up alone in his bedroom, shuts his windows to keep out the beautiful daylight, and makes himself an artificial night. this mood of his is going to bring bad news, unless someone smart can fix what's bothering him.", "my noble uncle, do you know why he acts this way?", "i don't know, and he won't tell me.", "have you done everything you could to make him tell you the reason?", "i've tried, and many of our friends have tried to make him talk, but he keeps his thoughts to himself. he doesn't want any friend but himself, and though i don't know whether he's a friend to himself, he certainly keeps his own secrets. he's like a flower bud that won't open itself up to the world because it's been poisoned from within by parasites. if we could only find out why he's sad, we'd be as eager to help him as we were to learn the reason for his sadness.", "look here he comes. if you don't mind, please step aside. he'll either have to tell me what's wrong or else tell me no over and over.", "i hope you're lucky enough to hear the true story by sticking around. come, madam, let's go."], ["good morning, cousin.", "is it that early in the day?", "it's only just now nine o'clock.", "oh my, time goes by slowly when you're sad. was that my father who left here in such a hurry?", "it was. what's making you so sad and your hours so long?", "i don't have the thing that makes time fly.", "you're in love?", "out.", "out of love?", "i love someone. she doesn't love me.", "it's sad. love looks like a nice thing, but it's actually very rough when you experience it.", "what's sad is that love is supposed to be blind, but it can still make you do whatever it wants. so, where should we eat? oh my! what fight happened here? no, don't tell me i know all about it. this fight has a lot to do with hatred, but it has more to do with love. o brawling love! o loving hate! love that comes from nothing! sad happiness! serious foolishness! beautiful things muddled together into an ugly mess! love is heavy and light, bright and dark, hot and cold, sick and healthy, asleep and awake it's everything except what it is! this is the love i feel, though no one loves me back. are you laughing?"], ["no, cousin, i'm crying.", "good man, why are you crying?", "i'm crying because of how sad you are.", "yes, this is what love does. my sadness sits heavy in my chest, and you want to add your own sadness to mine so there's even more. i have too much sadness already, and now you're going to make me sadder by feeling sorry for you. here's what love is: a smoke made out of lovers' sighs. when the smoke clears, love is a fire burning in your lover's eyes. if you frustrate love, you get an ocean made out of lovers' tears. what else is love? it's a wise form of madness. it's a sweet lozenge that you choke on. goodbye, cousin.", "wait. i'll come with you. if you leave me like this, you're doing me wrong.", "i'm not myself. i'm not here. this isn't romeo he's somewhere else.", "tell me seriously, who is the one you love?", "seriously? you mean i should groan and tell you?", "groan? no. but tell me seriously who it is."], ["you wouldn't tell a sick man he \"seriously\" has to make his will it would just make him worse. seriously, cousin, i love a woman.", "i guessed that already when i guessed you were in love.", "then you were right on target. the woman i love is beautiful.", "a beautiful target is the one that gets hit the fastest.", "well, you're not on target there. she refuses to be hit by arrow. she's as clever as diana, and shielded by the armor of chastity. she can't be touched by the weak and childish arrows of love. she won't listen to words of love, or let you look at her with loving eyes, or open her lap to receive gifts of gold. she's rich in beauty, but she's also poor, because when she dies her beauty will be destroyed with her.", "so she's made a vow to be a virgin forever?", "yes she has, and by keeping celibate, she wastes her beauty. if you starve yourself of sex you can't ever have children, and so your beauty is lost to future generations. she's too beautiful and too wise to deserve heaven's blessing by making me despair. she's sworn off love, and that promise has left me alive but dead, living only to talk about it now.", "take my advice. don't think about her.", "teach me to forget to think!"], ["do it by letting your eyes wander freely. look at other beautiful girls.", "that will only make me think more about how beautiful is. beautiful women like to wear black masks over their faces those black masks only make us think about how beautiful they are underneath. a man who goes blind can't forget the precious eyesight he lost. show me a really beautiful girl. her beauty is like a note telling me where i can see someone even more beautiful. goodbye. you can't teach me to forget.", "i'll show you how to forget, or else i'll die owing you that lesson."], ["but montague has sworn an oath just like i have, and he's under the same penalty. i don't think it will be hard for men as old as we are to keep the peace.", "you both have honorable reputations, and it's too bad you've been enemies for so long. but what do you say to my request?", "i can only repeat what i've said before. my daughter is still very young. she's not even fourteen years old. let's wait two more summers before we start thinking she's ready to get married.", "girls younger than she often marry and become happy mothers.", "girls who marry so young grow up too soon. but go ahead and charm her, gentle paris; make her love you. my permission is only part of her decision. if she agrees to marry you, my blessing and fair words will confirm her choice. tonight i'm having a feast that we've celebrated for many years. i've invited many of my closest friends, and i'd like to welcome you and add you to the guest list. at my humble house tonight, you can expect to see dazzling stars that walk on the ground and light the sky from below."], ["you'll be delighted by young women as fresh as spring flowers. look at anyone you like, and choose whatever woman seems best to you. once you see a lot of girls, you might not think my daughter's the best anymore. come along with me.", "peter, go, little fellow, walk all around verona. find the people on this list and tell them they're welcome at my house tonight.", "find the people whose names are on this list? it is written that shoemakers and tailors should play with each others' tools, that fisherman should play with paints, and painters should play with with fishing nets. but i've been sent to find the people whose names are written on this list, and i can't read! i'll never find them on my own. i've got to find somebody who knows how to read to help me. but here come some people, right in the nick of time.", "romeo come on, man. you can put out one fire by starting another. a new pain will make the one you already have seem less. if you make yourself dizzy, you can cure yourself by spinning back around in the opposite direction. a new grief will put the old one out of your mind. make yourself lovesick by gazing at some new girl, and your old lovesickness will be cured."], ["the leaf is excellent for that.", "for what, romeo?", "for when you cut your shin.", "what? romeo, are you crazy?", "i'm not crazy, but i'm tied up tighter than a mental patient in a straitjacket. i'm locked up in a prison and deprived of food. i'm whipped and tortured peter good evening, good fellow.", "may god give you a good evening. excuse me, sir, do you know how to read?", "i can read my own fortune in my misery.", "perhaps you've learned from life and not from books. but please tell me, can you read anything you see?", "yes, if i know the language and the letters.", "i see. well, that's an . have a nice day.", "stay, fellow. i can read. \"signor martino and his wife and daughters, count anselme and his beautiful sisters, vitruvio's widow, signor placentio and his lovely nieces, mercutio and his brother valentine, my uncle capulet and his wife and daughters, my fair niece rosaline and livia,"], ["signor valentio and his cousin tybalt, lucio and the lively helena.\" that's a nice group of people. where are they supposed to come?", "up.", "where? to supper?", "to our house.", "whose house?", "my master's house.", "indeed, i should have asked you before who he was.", "now i'll tell you so you don't have to ask. my master is the great and rich capulet, and if you don't belong to the house of montague, please come and drink a cup of wine. have a nice day!", "the beautiful rosaline whom you love so much will be at capulet's traditional feast, along with every beautiful woman in verona. go there and compare her objectively to some other girls i'll show you. the woman who you think is as beautiful as a swan is going to look as ugly as a crow to you.", "if my eyes ever lie to me like that, let my tears turn into flames and burn them for being such obvious liars! a woman more beautiful than the one i love? the sun itself has never seen anyone as beautiful since the world began."], ["come on, you first decided she was beautiful when no one else was around. there was no one to compare her to except herself. but let your eyes compare her to another beautiful woman who i'll show you at this feast, and you won't think she's the best anymore.", "i'll go with you. not because i think you'll show me anything better, but so i can see the woman i love."], ["nurse, where's my daughter? tell her to come to me.", "i swear to you by my virginity at age twelve, i already told her to come. come on! where is she? what is she doing? what, juliet!", "what is it? who's calling me?", "your mother.", "madam, i'm here. what do you want?", "i'll tell you what's the matter nurse, leave us alone for a little while. we must talk privately nurse, come back here. i just remembered, you can listen to our secrets. you know how young my daughter is.", "yes, i know her age down to the hour.", "she's not even fourteen.", "i'd bet fourteen of my own teeth but, i'm sorry to say, i only have four teeth she's not fourteen. how long is it until ?", "two weeks and a few odd days."], ["whether it's even or odd, of all the days in the year, on the night of lammas eve, she'll be fourteen. she and susan god rest her and all christian souls were born on the same day. well, susan died and is with god. she was too good for me. but like i said, on the night of lammas eve, she will be fourteen. yes, she will. indeed, i remember it well. it's been eleven years since the earthquake. she stopped nursing from my breast on that very day. i'll never forget it. i had put bitter wormwood on my breast as i was sitting in the sun, under the wall of the dovehouse. you and your husband were in mantua. boy, do i have some memory! but like i said, when she tasted the bitter wormwood on my nipple, the pretty little babe got irritated and started to quarrel with my breast. then the dovehouse shook with the earthquake. there was no need to tell me to get out of there. that was eleven years ago. by then she could stand up all by herself. no, i swear, by that time she could run and waddle all around. i remember because she had cut her forehead just the day before. my husband god rest his soul, he was a happy man picked up the child. \"oh,\" he said, \"did you fall on your face? you'll when you grow smarter. won't you, jule.\" and i swear, the poor pretty thing stopped crying and said, \"yes.\" oh, to watch a joke come true! i bet if i live a thousand years, i'll never forget it. \"won't you, jule,\" he said. and the pretty fool stopped crying and said, \"yes.\"", "enough of this. please be quiet."], ["yes ,madam. but i can't help laughing to think that the baby stopped crying and said, \"yes.\" i swear, she had a bump on her forehead as big as a rooster's testicle. it was a painful bruise, and she was crying bitterly. \"yes,\" said my husband, \"did you fall on your face? you'll fall backward when you grow up, won't you, jule?\" and she stopped crying and said, \"yes.\"", "now you stop too, nurse, please.", "peace. i'm done talking. may god choose you to receive his grace. you were the prettiest baby i ever nursed. if i live to see you get married someday, all my wishes will come true.", "well, marriage is exactly what we have to discuss. tell me, my daughter juliet, what is your attitude about getting married?", "it is an honor that i do not dream of.", "\"an honor?\" if i weren't your only nurse, i'd say you had sucked wisdom from the breast that fed you.", "well, start thinking about marriage now. here in verona there are girls younger than you girls from noble families who have already become mothers. by my count, i was already your mother at just about your age, while you remain a virgin. well then, i'll say this quickly: the valiant paris wants you as his bride.", "what a man, young lady. he's as great a man as any in the whole world. he's as perfect as if he were sculpted from wax."], ["summertime in verona has no flower as fine as him.", "no, he's a fine flower, truly, a flower.", "juliet what do you say? can you love this gentleman? tonight you'll see him at our feast. study paris's face and find pleasure in his beauty. examine every line of his features and see how they work together to make him handsome. if you are confused, just look into his eyes. this man is single, and he lacks only a bride to make him perfect and complete. as is right, fish live in the sea, and it's wrong for a beauty like you to hide from a handsome man like him. many people think he's handsome, and whoever becomes his bride will be just as admired. you would share all that he possesses, and by having him, you would lose nothing.", "lose nothing? in fact, you'd get bigger. men make women bigger by getting them pregnant.", "juliet give us a quick answer. can you accept paris's love?", "i'll look at him and try to like him, at least if what i see is likable. but i won't let myself fall for him any more than your permission allows."], ["madam, the guests are here, dinner is served, people are calling for you, people have asked for juliet, and in the pantry, people are cursing the nurse. everything's out of control. i must go and serve the guests. please, follow straight after me.", "we'll follow you. juliet, the count is waiting for you.", "go, girl, look for a man who'll give you happy nights at the end of happy days."], ["what will we say is our excuse for being here? or should we enter without apologizing?", "it's out of fashion to give lengthy explanations like that. we're not going to introduce our dance by having someone dress up as cupid, blindfolded and carrying a toy bow to frighten the ladies like a scarecrow. nor are we going to recite a memorized speech to introduce ourselves. let them judge us however they please. we'll give them a dance and then hit the road.", "give me a torch. i don't want to dance. i feel sad, so let me be the one who carries the light.", "no, noble romeo, you've got to dance.", "not me, believe me. you're wearing dancing shoes with nimble soles. my soul is made out of lead, and it's so heavy it keeps me stuck on the ground so i can't move.", "you're a lover. take cupid's wings and fly higher than the average man.", "his arrow has pierced me too deeply, so i can't fly high with his cheerful feathers. because this wound keeps me down, i can't leap any higher than my dull sadness. i sink under the heavy weight of love."], ["if you sink, you're dragging love down. it's not right to drag down something as tender as love.", "is love really tender? i think it's too rough, too rude, too rowdy, and it pricks like a thorn.", "if love plays rough with you, play rough with . if you prick love when it pricks you, you'll beat love down. give me a mask to put my face in. a mask to put over my other mask. what do i care if some curious person sees my flaws? let this mask, with its black eyebrows, blush for me.", "come on, let's knock and go in. the minute we get in let's all start dancing.", "i'll take a torch. let playful people with light hearts dance. there's an old saying that applies to me: you can't lose if you don't play the game. i'll just hold a torch and watch you guys. it looks like a lot of fun, but i'll sit this one out.", "hey, you're being a stick in the mud, as cautious as a policemen on night patrol. if you're a stick in the mud, we'll pull you out of the mud i mean out of love, if you'll excuse me for being so rude where you're stuck up to your ears. come on, we're wasting precious daylight. let's go!", "no we're not it's night.", "i mean, we're wasting the light of our torches by delaying, which is like wasting the sunshine during the day. use your common sense to figure out what i mean, instead of trying to be clever or trusting your five senses."], ["we mean well by going to this masquerade ball, but it's not smart of us to go.", "why, may i ask?", "i had a dream last night.", "so did i.", "well, what was your dream?", "my dream told me that dreamers often lie.", "they lie in bed while they dream about the truth.", "oh, then i see you've been with mab.", "who's queen mab?", "she's the fairies' midwife. she's no bigger than the stone on a city councilman's ring. she rides around in a wagon drawn by tiny little atoms, and she rides over men's noses as they lie sleeping. the spokes of her wagon are made of spiders' legs. the cover of her wagon is made of grasshoppers' wings. the harnesses are made of the smallest spiderwebs. the collars are made out of moonbeams. her whip is a thread attached to a cricket's bone. her wagon driver is a tiny bug in a gray coat; he's not half the size of a little round that comes from the finger of a lazy young girl."], ["her chariot is a hazelnut shell. it was made by a carpenter squirrel or an old grubworm; they've made wagons for the fairies as long as anyone can remember. in this royal wagon, she rides every night through the brains of lovers and makes them dream about love. she rides over courtiers' knees, and they dream about curtsying. she rides over lawyers' fingers, and right away, they dream about their fees. she rides over ladies' lips, and they immediately dream of kisses. queen mab often puts blisters on their lips because their breath smells like candy, which makes her mad. sometimes she rides over a courtier's lips, and he dreams of making money off of someone. sometimes she tickles a priest's nose with a tail, and he dreams of a large donation. sometimes she rides over a soldier's neck, and he dreams of cutting the throats of foreign enemies, of breaking down walls, of ambushes, of spanish swords, and of enormous cups of liquor. and then, drums beat in his ear and he wakes up. he's frightened, so he says a couple of prayers and goes back to sleep. she is the same mab who tangles the hair in horses' manes at night and makes the tangles hard in the dirty hairs, which bring bad luck if they're untangled. mab is the old hag who gives false sex dreams to virgins and teaches them how to hold a lover and bear a child. she's the one", "enough, enough! mercutio, be quiet. you're talking nonsense.", "true. i'm talking about dreams, which are the products of a brain that's doing nothing. dreams are nothing but silly imagination, as thin as air, and less predictable than the wind, which sometimes blows on the frozen north and then gets angry and blows south."], ["the wind you're talking about is blowing us off our course. dinner is over, and we're going to get there too late.", "i'm worried we'll get there too early. i have a feeling this party tonight will be the start of something bad, something that will end with my own death. but whoever's in charge of where my life's going can steer me wherever they want. onward, lover boys!", "beat the drum."], ["where's potpan? why isn't he helping us clear the table? he should be moving and scraping plates!", "when only one or two men have all the good manners, and even they are dirty, things are bad.", "take away the stools, the sideboards, and the plates. you, good friend, save me a piece of marzipan, and if you love me, have the porter let in susan grindstone and nell. antony and potpan!", "yes, boy, i'm ready.", "they're looking for you in the great chamber.", "we can't be in two places at once, both here and there! cheers, boys. be quick for a while and let the one who lives the longest take everything.", "welcome, gentlemen. the ladies who don't have corns on their toes will dance with you. ha, my ladies, which of you will refuse to dance now? whichever of you acts shy, i'll swear she has corns. does that hit close to home? welcome, gentlemen. there was a time when i could wear a mask over my eyes and charm a lady by whispering a story in her ear. that time is gone, gone, gone. you are welcome gentlemen. come on, musicians, play music. romeo make room in the hall. make room in the hall. shake a leg, girls servingmen more light, you rascals. flip over the tables and get them out of the way. and put the fire out it's getting too hot in here. cousin ah, my man, this unexpected fun feels good. no, sit down, sit down, my good capulet cousin. you and i are too old to dance. capulet cousin how long is it now since you and i last wore masks at a party like this?"], ["i swear, it must be thirty years.", "what, man? it's not that long, it's not that long. it's been since lucentio's wedding. let the years fly by as fast as they like, it's only been twenty-five years since we wore masks.", "it's been longer, it's been longer. lucentio's son is older than that, sir. he's thirty years old.", "are you really going to tell me that? his son was a minor only two years ago.", "servingman who is the girl on the arm of that lucky knight over there?", "i don't know, sir.", "oh, she shows the torches how to burn bright! she stands out against the darkness like a jeweled earring hanging against the cheek of an african. her beauty is too good for this world; she's too beautiful to die and be buried. she outshines the other women like a white dove in the middle of a flock of crows. when this dance is over, i'll see where she stands, and then i'll touch her hand with my rough and ugly one. did my heart ever love anyone before this moment? my eyes were liars, then, because i never saw true beauty before tonight."], ["i can tell by his voice that this man is a montague. page get me my sword, boy. what, does this peasant dare to come here with his face covered by a mask to sneer at and scorn our celebration? now, by the honor of our family, i do not consider it a crime to kill him.", "why, what's going on here, nephew? why are you acting so angry?", "uncle, this man is a montague our enemy. he's a scoundrel who's come here out of spite to mock our party.", "is it young romeo?", "that's him, that villain romeo.", "calm down, gentle cousin. leave him alone. he carries himself like a dignified gentleman, and, to tell you the truth, he has a reputation throughout verona as a virtuous and well-behaved young man. i wouldn't insult him in my own house for all the wealth in this town. so calm down. just ignore him. that's what i want, and if you respect my wishes, you'll look nice and stop frowning because that's not the way you should behave at a feast."], ["it's the right way to act when a villain like him shows up. i won't tolerate him.", "you tolerate him. what, little man? i say you will. what the am i the boss here or you? what the you won't tolerate him! god help me! you'll start a riot among my guests! there will be chaos! it will be your fault, you'll be the rabble-rouser!", "but, uncle, we're being disrespected.", "go on, go on. you're an insolent little boy. is that how it is, really? this stupidity will come back to bite you. i know what i'll do. you have to contradict me, do you? i'll teach you a lesson. guests well done, my dear guests! tybalt you're a punk, get away. keep your mouth shut, or else servingmen more light, more light! tybalt you should be ashamed. 'll shut you up. keep having fun, my dear friends!", "the combination of forced patience and pure rage is making my body tremble. i'll leave here now, but romeo's prank, which seems so sweet to him now, will turn bitter to him later."], ["juliet your hand is like a holy place that my hand is unworthy to visit. if you're offended by the touch of my hand, my two lips are standing here like blushing pilgrims, ready to make things better with a kiss.", "good pilgrim, you don't give your hand enough credit. by holding my hand you show polite devotion. after all, pilgrims touch the hands of statues of saints. holding one palm against another is like a kiss.", "don't saints and pilgrims have lips too?", "yes, pilgrim they have lips that they're supposed to pray with.", "well then, saint, let lips do what hands do. i'm praying for you to kiss me. please grant my prayer so my faith doesn't turn to despair.", "saints don't move, even when they grant prayers.", "then don't move while i act out my prayer.", ".", "now my sin has been taken from my lips by yours.", "then do my lips now have the sin they took from yours?", "sin from my lips? you encourage crime with your sweetness. give me my sin back."], ["you kiss like you've studied how.", "madam, your mother wants to talk to you.", "who is her mother?", "indeed, young man, her mother is the lady of the house. she is a good, wise, and virtuous lady. i nursed her daughter, whom you were just talking to. let me tell you, the man who marries her will become very wealthy.", "is she a capulet? oh, this is a heavy price to pay! my life is in the hands of my enemy.", "romeo come on, let's go. right when things are the most fun is the best time to leave.", "yes, but i'm afraid i'm in more trouble than ever.", "no gentlemen, don't get ready to go now. we have a little dessert coming up. is that really true? well, then, i thank you both. i thank you, honest gentlemen. good night. bring more torches over here! come on, let's all get to bed. cousin ah, my man, i swear, it's getting late. i'm going to get some rest."], ["come over here, nurse. who is that gentleman?", "he is the son and heir of old tiberio.", "who's the one who's going out the door right now?", "well, that one, i think, is young petruchio.", "who's the one following over there, the one who wouldn't dance?", "i don't know his name.", "go ask. if he's married, i think i'll die rather than marry anyone else.", "his name is romeo. he's a montague. he's the only son of your worst enemy.", "the only man i love is the son of the only man i hate! i saw him too early without knowing who he was, and i found out who he was too late! love is a monster for making me fall in love with my worst enemy.", "what's this? what's this?", "just a rhyme i learned from somebody i danced with at the party.", "right away, right away. come, let's go. the strangers are all gone."], ["now romeo's old feelings of desire are dying, and a new desire is eager to take their place. romeo groaned for the beautiful rosaline and said he would die for her, but compared with tender juliet, rosaline doesn't seem beautiful now. now someone loves romeo, and he's in love again both of them falling for each others' good looks. but he has to make his speeches of love to a woman who's supposed to be his enemy. and she's been hooked by someone she should fear. because he's an enemy, romeo has no chance to see juliet and say the things a lover normally says. and juliet's just as much in love as he, but she has even less opportunity to meet her lover. but love gives them power, and time gives them the chance to meet, sweetening the extreme danger with intense pleasure."], ["can i go away while my heart stays here? i have to go back to where my heart is.", "romeo, my cousin, romeo, romeo!", "he's a smart boy. i bet he slipped away and went home to bed.", "he ran this way and jumped over this orchard wall. call to him, mercutio.", "i'll conjure him as if i were summoning a spirit. romeo! madman! passion! lover! show yourself in the form of a sigh. speak one rhyme, and i'll be satisfied. just cry out, \"ah me!\" just say \"love\" and \"dove.\" say just one lovely word to my good friend . just say the nickname of her blind son cupid, the one who shot arrows so well in the old story. romeo doesn't hear me. he doesn't stir. he doesn't move. the silly ape is dead, but i must make him appear. i summon you by rosaline's bright eyes, by her high forehead and her red lips, by her fine feet, by her straight legs, by her trembling thighs, and by the regions right next to her thighs. in the name of all of these things, i command you to appear before us in your true form."], ["if he hears you, you'll make him angry.", "what i'm saying can't anger him. he would be angry if i summoned a strange spirit for her to have sex with that's what would make him angry. the things i'm saying are fair and honest. all i'm doing is saying the name of the woman he loves to lure him out of the darkness.", "come on. he's hidden behind these trees to keep the night company. his love is blind, so it belongs in the dark.", "if love is blind, it can't hit the target. now he'll sit under a tree and wish his mistress were one of those fruits that look like female genitalia. oh romeo, i wish she an open-arse, and you a popperin pear to \"pop her in.\" good night, romeo. i'll go to my little trundle bed. this open field is too cold a place for me to sleep. benvolio come on, should we go?", "let's go. there's no point in looking for him if he doesn't want to be found."], ["it's easy for someone to joke about scars if they've never been cut.", "but wait, what's that light in the window over there? it is the east, and juliet is the sun. rise up, beautiful sun, and kill the . the moon is already sick and pale with grief because you, juliet, her maid, are more beautiful than she. don't be her maid, because she is jealous. virginity makes her look sick and green. only fools hold on to their virginity. let it go. oh, there's my lady! oh, it is my love. oh, i wish she knew how much i love her. she's talking, but she's not saying anything. so what? her eyes are saying something. i will answer them. i am too bold. she's not talking to me. two of the brightest stars in the whole sky had to go away on business, and they're asking her eyes to twinkle in their places until they return. what if her eyes were in the sky and the stars were in her head? the brightness of her cheeks would outshine the stars the way the sun outshines a lamp. if her eyes were in the night sky, they would shine so brightly through space that birds would start singing, thinking her light was the light of day. look how she leans her hand on her cheek. oh, i wish i was the glove on that hand so that i could touch that cheek.", "oh, my!"], ["she speaks. oh, speak again, bright angel. you are as glorious as an angel tonight. you shine above me, like a winged messenger from heaven who makes mortal men fall on their backs to look up at the sky, watching the angel walking on the clouds and sailing on the air.", "romeo oh, romeo, romeo, why do you have to be romeo? forget about your father and change your name. or else, if you won't change your name, just swear you love me and i'll stop being a capulet.", "should i listen for more, or should i speak now?", "romeo it's only your name that's my enemy. you'd still be yourself even if you stopped being a montague. what's a montague anyway? it isn't a hand, a foot, an arm, a face, or any other part of a man. oh, be some other name! what does a name mean? the thing we call a rose would smell just as sweet if we called it by any other name. romeo would be just as perfect even if he wasn't called romeo. romeo, lose your name. trade in your name which really has nothing to do with you and take all of me in exchange.", "juliet i trust your words. just call me your love, and i will take a new name. from now on i will never be romeo again.", "who are you? why do you hide in the darkness and listen to my private thoughts?"], ["i don't know how to tell you who i am by telling you a name. i hate my name, dear saint, because my name is your enemy. if i had it written down, i would tear up the paper.", "i haven't heard you say a hundred words yet, but i recognize the sound of your voice. aren't you romeo? and aren't you a montague?", "i am neither of those things if you dislike them.", "tell me, how did you get in here? and why did you come? the orchard walls are high, and it's hard to climb over them. if any of my relatives find you here they'll kill you because of who you are.", "i flew over these walls with the light wings of love. stone walls can't keep love out. whatever a man in love can possibly do, his love will make him try to do it. therefore your relatives are no obstacle.", "if they see you, they'll murder you.", "alas, one angry look from you would be worse than twenty of your relatives with swords. just look at me kindly, and i'm invincible against their hatred.", "i'd give anything to keep them from seeing you here.", "the darkness will hide me from them. and if you don't love me, let them find me here. i'd rather they killed me than have to live without your love."], ["who told you how to get here below my bedroom?", "love showed me the way the same thing that made me look for you in the first place. love told me what to do, and i let love borrow my eyes. i'm not a sailor, but if you were across the farthest sea, i would risk everything to gain you.", "you can't see my face because it's dark out. otherwise, you'd see me blushing about the things you've heard me say tonight. i would be happy to keep up good manners and deny the things i said. but forget about good manners. do you love me? i know you'll say \"yes,\" and i'll believe you. but if you swear you love me, you might turn out to be lying. they say laughs when lovers lie to each other. oh romeo, if you really love me, say it truly. or if you think it's too easy and quick to win my heart, i'll frown and play hard-to-get, as long as that will make you try to win me, but otherwise i wouldn't act that way for anything. in truth, handsome montague, i like you too much, so you may think my behavior is loose. but trust me, gentleman, i'll prove myself more faithful than girls who act coy and play hard-to-get. i should have been more standoffish, i confess, but you overheard me talking about the love in my heart when i didn't know you were there. so excuse me, and do not assume that because you made me love you so easily my love isn't serious.", "lady, i swear by the sacred moon above, the moon that paints the tops of fruit trees with silver"], ["don't swear by the moon. the moon is always changing. every month its position in the sky shifts. i don't want you to turn out to be that inconsistent too.", "what should i swear by?", "don't swear at all. but if you have to swear, swear by your wonderful self, which is the god i worship like an idol, and then i'll believe you.", "if my heart's dear love", "well, don't swear. although you bring me joy, i can't take joy in this exchange of promises tonight. it's too crazy. we haven't done enough thinking. it's too sudden. it's too much like lightning, which flashes and then disappears before you can say, \"it's lightning.\" my sweet, good night. our love, which right now is like a flower bud in the summer air, may turn out to be a beautiful flower by the next time we meet. i hope you enjoy the same sweet peace and rest i feel in my heart.", "oh, are you going to leave me so unsatisfied?", "what satisfaction could you possibly have tonight?", "i would be satisfied if we made each other true promises of love.", "i pledged my love to you before you asked me to. yet i wish i could take that promise back, so i had it to give again.", "you would take it back? why would you do that, my love?"], ["only to be generous and give it to you once more. but i'm wishing for something i already have. my generosity to you is as limitless as the sea, and my love is as deep. the more love i give you, the more i have. both loves are infinite.", "i hear a noise inside. dear love, goodbye just a minute, good nurse. sweet montague, be true. stay here for a moment. i'll come back.", "oh, blessed, blessed night! because it's dark out, i'm afraid all this is just a dream, too sweet to be real.", "three words, dear romeo, and then it's good night for real. if your intentions as a lover are truly honorable and you want to marry me, send me word tomorrow. i'll send a messenger to you, and you can pass on a message telling me where and when we'll be married. i'll lay all my fortunes at your feet and follow you, my lord, all over the world.", "madam!", "nurse i'll be right there! romeo but if you don't have honorable intentions, i beg you", "madam!"], ["alright, i'm coming! i beg you to stop trying for me and leave me to my sadness. tomorrow i'll send the messenger.", "my soul depends on it", "a thousand times good night.", "leaving you is a thousand times worse than being near you. a lover goes toward his beloved as enthusiastically as a schoolboy leaving his books, but when he leaves his girlfriend, he feels as miserable as the schoolboy on his way to school.", "hist, romeo! hist! oh, i wish i could make a call, so i could bring my little falcon back again. i'm trapped in my family's house, so i must be quiet. otherwise i would rip open the cave where sleeps. i would make her repeat his name until her voice grew more hoarse than mine by repeating, \"my romeo!\"", "my soul is calling out my name. the sound of lovers calling each others names through the night is silver-sweet. it's the sweetest sound a lover ever hears."], ["romeo!", "my baby hawk?", "what time tomorrow should i send a messenger to you?", "by nine o'clock.", "i won't fail. from now until then seems like twenty years. i have forgotten why i called you back.", "let me stand here until you remember your reason.", "i'll forget it, and you'll have to stand there forever. i'll only remember how much i love your company.", "i'll keep standing here, even if you keep forgetting. i'll forget that i have any home besides this spot right here.", "it's almost morning. i want to make you go, but i'd only let you go as far as a spoiled child lets his pet bird go. he lets the bird hop a little from his hand and then yanks him back by a string.", "i wish i was your bird.", "my sweet, so do i. but i would kill you by petting you too much. good night, good night. parting is such sweet sorrow that i'll say good night until tonight becomes tomorrow."], ["i hope you sleep peacefully. i wish i were sleep and peace, so i could spend the night with you. now i'll go see my priest, to ask for his help and tell him about my good luck."], ["the smiling morning is replacing the frowning night. darkness is stumbling out of the sun's path like a drunk man. now, before the sun comes up and burns away the dew, i have to fill this basket of mine with poisonous weeds and medicinal flowers. the earth is nature's mother and also nature's tomb. plants are born out of the earth, and they are buried in the earth when they die. from the earth's womb, many different sorts of plants and animals come forth, and the earth provides her children with many excellent forms of nourishment. everything nature creates has some special property, and each one is different. herbs, plants, and stones possess great power. there is nothing on earth that is so evil that it does not provide the earth with some special quality. and there is nothing that does not turn bad if it's put to the wrong use and abused. virtue turns to vice if it's misused. vice sometimes becomes virtue through the right activity.", "inside the little rind of this weak flower, there is both poison and powerful medicine. if you smell it, you feel good all over your body. but if you taste it, you die. there are two opposite elements in everything, in men as well as in herbs good and evil."], ["when evil is dominant, death soon kills the body like cancer.", "good morning, father.", "god bless you. who greets me so early in the morning? young man, something's wrong if you're getting out of bed this early. every old man has worries, and worried men never get any sleep, but young men shouldn't have a care in the world. they should get to bed early and get plenty of sleep. therefore, the fact that you're awake this early tells me you've been upset with some anxiety. if that's not the case, then this must be the answer: you, romeo, have not been to bed tonight.", "your last guess is right. i enjoyed a sweeter rest than sleep.", "may god forgive you if you've sinned! were you with rosaline?", "with rosaline, father? no, i have forgotten that girl and all the sadness she brought me.", "that's good, my boy. but where have you been?", "i'll tell you before you have to ask me again. i have been feasting with my enemy. suddenly someone wounded me with love and was wounded with love by me. you have the sacred power to cure both of us. i carry no hatred, holy man, because my request will benefit my enemy."], ["speak plainly, make your meaning clear, my son. a jumbled confession can only receive a jumbled absolution.", "i love rich capulet's daughter. i love her, and she loves me. we're bound to each other in every possible way, except we need you to marry us. i'll tell you more later about when and where we met, how we fell in love, and how we exchanged promises, but now i'm begging you: please, agree to marry us today.", "holy saint francis, this is a drastic change! have you given up so quickly on rosaline, whom you loved so much? then young men love with their eyes, not with their hearts. jesus and mary, how many tears did you cry for rosaline? how many salty tear-drops did you waste salting a love you never tasted? the sun hasn't yet melted away the fog you made with all your sighs. the groans you used to make are still ringing in my old ears. there's still a stain on your cheek from an old tear that hasn't been washed off yet. if you were ever yourself, and this sadness was yours, you and your sadness were all for rosaline. and now you've changed? then repeat this after me: you can't expect women to be faithful when men are so unreliable.", "you scolded me often for loving rosaline.", "i scolded you for obsessing about her, not for loving her, my student.", "and you told me to bury my love."], ["i didn't tell you to get rid of one love and replace her with another.", "please, i beg you, don't scold me. the girl i love now returns my love. the other girl did not love me.", "oh, she knew very well that you were acting like you were in love without really knowing what love means. but come on, inconsistent young man, come with me. i'll help you with your secret wedding. this marriage may be lucky enough to turn the hatred between your families into pure love.", "let's get out of here. i'm in a rush.", "go wisely and slowly. those who rush stumble and fall."], ["where the devil can romeo be? didn't he come home last night?", "not to his father's house. i asked a servant.", "that fair-skinned, hard-hearted hussy, rosaline is going to torment him until he goes insane.", "tybalt, old capulet's nephew, has sent a letter to romeo's father's house.", "i bet it's a challenge.", "romeo will answer the challenge.", "any man who knows how to write can answer a letter.", "no, romeo will respond to the letter's writer, telling him whether he accepts the challenge.", "oh, poor romeo! he's already dead. he's been stabbed by a white girl's black eye. he's been cut through the ear with a love song. the center of his heart has been split by blind cupid's arrow. is he man enough at this point to face off with tybalt?", "why, what's tybalt's story?", "he's tougher than the . he does everything by the book. he fights like you sing at a recital, paying attention to time, distance, and proportion. he takes the proper breaks: one, two, and the third in your heart. he's the butcher who can hit any silk button. a master of duels. he's a gentleman from the finest school of fencing. he knows how to turn any argument into a swordfight. the forward thrust the the backhand thrust and the the thrust that goes straight through."], ["he knows what?", "i hate these crazy, affected guys who use foreign phrases and newfangled expressions. i hate their strange manners and their weird accents! i hate it when they say, \"by jesus, this is a very good blade, a very brave man, a very good whore.\" isn't this a sad thing, my good man? why should we put up with these foreign buzzards, these fashionmongers, these guys who say \"pardon me,\" these guys who care so much about manners that they can't kick back on a bench without whining? \"oh, my aching bones!\"", "here comes romeo, here comes romeo!", "he looks skinny, like a dried herring without its eggs, and he hasn't got his girl. o flesh, flesh, you've turned pale and weak like a fish. now he's ready for poetry. compared to romeo's girl, laura was a kitchen slave. surely she has a better love to make rhymes for her. dido was shabbily dressed. cleopatra was a gypsy girl. helen and hero were sluts and harlots. thisbe might have had a blue eye or two, but that doesn't matter. signor romeo, there's a french greeting that matches your drooping french-style pants. you faked us out pretty good last night."], ["good morning to you both. what do you mean i faked you out?", "you gave us the slip, sir, the slip. can't you understand what i'm saying?", "excuse me, good mercutio. i had very important business to take care of. it was so important that i had to forget about courtesy and good manners.", "in other words \"important business\" made you .", "you mean do a curtsy?", "you've hit the , sir.", "that's a very polite and courteous explanation.", "yes, i am the pink flower the master, of courtesy and manners.", "the .", "right."], ["well, then my is well decorated with flowers.", "alright my witty friend, this joke has worn out your pump. its thin skin is all worn out. the joke is all you have left.", "this is a bad joke. it's all silliness.", "come break this up, benvolio. i'm losing this duel of wits.", "keep going, keep going, or i'll declare myself the winner.", "now, if our jokes go on a wild-goose chase, i'm finished. you have more wild goose in one of your jokes than i have in five of mine. was i even close to you in the chase for the goose?", "you were never with me for anything if you weren't there for the goose.", "i'll bite you on the ear for that joke.", "no, good goose, don't bite me.", "your joke is a very bitter apple. your humor is a spicy sauce.", "then isn't it just the right dish for a sweet goose?", "oh, that's a joke made out of leather that spreads itself thin, from the width of an inch to as fat as a yard."], ["i stretch my joke for that word \"fat.\" if you add that word to the word \"goose,\" it shows that you are a fat goose.", "why, isn't all this joking better than groaning about love? now you're sociable. now you're romeo. now you are what you've learned to be and what you are naturally. this love of yours was like a blithering idiot who runs up and down looking for a hole to hide his in.", "stop there, stop there.", "you want me to stop my before i'm done.", "otherwise your tale would have gotten too long.", "oh, you're wrong. i would have made it short. i had come to the deepest part of my tale, and i planned to say nothing more on the topic.", "here's something good.", "", "there's two a man and a woman.", "peter!"], ["i'm at your service.", "give me my fan, peter.", "good peter, give her her fan to hide her face. her fan is prettier than her face.", "good morning, gentlemen.", "good afternoon, fair lady.", "is it now afternoon?", "it's not earlier than that, i tell you. the of the clock is now pricking noon.", "get out of here! what kind of man are you?", "i'm a man, my lady, that god has made for himself to ruin.", "i swear, you speak the truth. \"for himself to ruin,\" he says. gentlemen, can any of you tell me where i can find young romeo?", "i can tell you, but young romeo will be older when you find him than he was when you started looking for him. i am the youngest man by that name, because there is no one younger, or worse.", "you speak well."], ["is the worst well? very well taken, i believe, very wise.", "romeo if you're the romeo i'm looking for, sir, i would like to have a with you.", "she will him to some dinner party.", "a pimp! a pimp! a pimp! i've found it out.", "what have you found out?", "she's not a prostitute unless she's using her ugliness to hide her promiscuity.", "", "romeo, are you going to your father's for lunch? let's go there.", "i'll follow after you."], ["", "please tell me, sir, who was that foulmouthed punk who was so full of crude jokes?", "nurse, he's a man who likes to hear the sound of his own voice. he says more in one minute than he does in a whole month.", "if he says anything against me, i'll humble him, even if he were stronger than he is and twenty punks like him. if i can't do it myself, i'll find someone who can. that dirty rat! i'm not one of his sluts. i'm not one of his punk friends who carries a knife. peter and you just stand there letting every jerk make fun of me for kicks.", "i didn't see anybody use you for kicks. if i had seen something like that, i would have quickly pulled out my weapon. believe me, i'll draw my sword as quick as any other man if i see a fight starting and the law is on my side.", "now, i swear, i'm so angry that i'm shaking all over. that rotten scoundrel! romeo now, please, may i have a word with you, sir? my young mistress asked me to find you. what she asked me to say i'll keep to myself. but let me tell you this first. if you lead her into a fool's paradise, as the saying goes, it would be an outrageous crime because the girl is so young. and if you try to trick her, it would be an evil thing to do to any woman and very poor behavior."], ["nurse, give my regards to to your lady. i swear to you", "you have a good heart, and believe me, i'll tell her that. lord, lord, she'll be a happy woman.", "what are you going to tell her, nurse? you're not paying attention to me.", "sir, i'll tell her that you to her, which i think is the gentlemanly thing to do..", "tell her to devise a plan to get out of her house and come to confession at the abbey this afternoon. at friar lawrence's cell she can make confession and be married. here is a reward for your efforts.", "no, really, i won't take a penny.", "go on, i insist you take it.", "this afternoon, sir? she'll be there.", "wait good nurse. within an hour, one of my men will come to you behind the abbey wall and give you a rope ladder. i'll use the rope ladder to climb over the walls at night. then i'll meet juliet joyfully and in secret. goodbye. be honest and helpful, and i'll repay you for your efforts. goodbye. sing my praises to your mistress."], ["may god in heaven bless you. now please listen, sir.", "what do you have to say, my dear nurse?", "can your man keep a secret? haven't you ever heard the saying, \"two can conspire to put one away\"?", "i assure you, my man is as true as steel.", "well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. lord, lord, when she was a little baby oh, there is one nobleman in the city, a guy named paris, who would be happy to claim her as his own. juliet would rather look at a toad than at him. i make her angry sometimes by saying that paris is more handsome than you are. but when i say so, i swear she turns white as a sheet. don't \" \" and \"romeo\" begin with the same letter?", "yes, nurse, what about that? they both begin with the letter \"r.\"", "ah, you jokester that's the dog's name. \"r\" is for the no, i know it begins with another letter. she says the most beautiful things about you and rosemary. it would be good for you to hear the things she says.", "give my compliments to your lady.", "yes, a thousand times. peter!", "i'm ready.", "peter go ahead. go quickly."], ["i sent the nurse at nine o'clock. maybe she can't find him. that can't be. oh, she's slow! love's messengers should be thoughts, which fly ten times faster than sunbeams. they should be strong enough to push shadows over the dark hills. that's the way doves carry venus so fast, and that's why cupid has wings that let him fly as fast as the wind. now it's noon. that's three hours since nine o'clock, but she hasn't come back. if she was young and passionate, she'd move as fast as a ball. my words would bounce her to my sweet love, and his words would bounce her back to me. but a lot of old people act like they're already dead sluggish, slow, fat, and colorless, like lead.", "oh my god, here she comes! oh sweet nurse, what news do you bring? have you spoken to him? send your man away.", "peter, wait for me at the gate.", "now, good sweet nurse oh lord, why do you look so sad? even if the news is sad, tell me with a smile on your face. if the news is good, you're ruining the sweet news by playing a trick with a sour face like that."], ["i am tired. leave me alone for a minute. oh my, my bones ache so much. i've been running all over the place.", "i wish you had my bones, and i had your news. come on now, i beg you, speak, good nurse, speak.", "sweet jesus, you're in such a hurry! can't you wait for a moment? don't you see that i'm out of breath?", "how can you be out of breath when you have enough breath to tell me that you're out of breath? the excuse you make to delay the news is longer than the news itself. is the news good or bad? answer that question. tell me if it's good or bad, and i'll wait for the details. tell me so i can be satisfied. is it good or bad?", "well, you have made a foolish choice. you don't know how to pick a man. romeo? no, not him, though his face is more handsome than any man's, and his legs are prettier, and as for his hands and feet and body, they're not much to speak of, and yet they're beyond compare. he's not the most polite man in the world, but, believe me, he's gentle as a lamb. well, do what you want. be good. have you had lunch yet?", "no, i haven't had lunch. everything you told me i already knew. what does he say about our marriage? what about that?", "lord, what a headache i've got! my head is pounding. it feels like it'll break into twenty pieces. my back aches too juliet ooh, on the other side ah, my poor aching back! curse your heart for sending me running all over town. i could get sick and die."], ["believe me, i'm sorry you're in pain. sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what did my love romeo say?", "your love says, like an honorable gentleman, who is courteous, kind, handsome, and, i believe, virtuous where is your mother?", "where is my mother? why, she's inside. where else would she be? your answer is so strange! \"your love says, like an honorable gentleman, 'where is your mother?'\"", "oh holy mary, mother of god! are you this impatient? come on, you're being ridiculous! is this the cure for my aching bones? from now on, take care of your messages yourself.", "you're making such a fuss. come on, what did romeo say?", "do you have permission to go out and take confession today?", "i do.", "then hurry up and rush over to friar lawrence's cell. there's a husband there who's waiting to make you his wife. now i see the blood rushing to your cheeks. you blush bright red as soon as you hear any news. go to the church. i must go by a different path to get a rope ladder. your love will use it to climb up to your window while it's dark. i do the drudge work for your pleasure. but soon you'll be doing a wife's work all night long. go. i'll go to lunch. you go to friar lawrence's cell."], ["wish me luck. thank you, dear nurse."], ["may the heavens be happy with this holy act of marriage, so nothing unfortunate happens later to make us regret it.", "amen, amen. but whatever misfortunes occur, they can't ruin the joy i feel with one look at her. all you have to do is join our hands with holy words, then love-destroying death can do whatever it pleases. it's enough for me if i can call her mine.", "these sudden joys have sudden endings. they burn up in victory like fire and gunpowder. when they meet, as in a kiss, they explode. too much honey is delicious, but it makes you sick to your stomach. therefore, love each other in moderation. that is the key to long-lasting love. too fast is as bad as too slow.", "here comes the lady. oh,a footstep as light as hers will never endure the rocky road of life. lovers are so light they can walk on a spiderweb floating on a summer breeze, and yet not fall. that's how flimsy and unreal pleasure is.", "good evening, my spiritual confessor.", "romeo will thank you, my girl, for both of us."], ["i'll give him equal thanks, so we're even.", "ah, juliet if you're as happy as i am, and you're better with words, tell me about the happiness you imagine we'll have in our marriage.", "i can imagine more than i can say i have more on my mind than words. anyone who can count how much he has is poor. my true love has made me so rich that i can't count even half of my wealth.", "come, come with me, and we'll do the job quickly. because if you don't mind, i'm not leaving you two alone until you're united in marriage."], ["i'm begging you, good mercutio, let's call it a day. it's hot outside, and the capulets are wandering around. if we bump into them, we'll certainly get into a fight. when it's hot outside, people become angry and hot-blooded.", "you're like one of those guys who walks into a bar, slams his sword on the table, and then says, \"i pray i never have to use you.\" by the time he orders his second drink, he pulls his sword on the bartender for no reason at all.", "am i really like one of those guys?", "come on, you can be as angry as any guy in italy when you're in the mood. when someone does the smallest thing to make you angry, you get angry. and when you're in the mood to get angry, you find something to get angry about.", "and what about that?", "if there were two men like you, pretty soon there'd be none because the two of you would kill each other. you would fight with a man if he had one more whisker or one less whisker in his beard than you have in your beard. you'll fight with a man who's cracking nuts just because you have hazelnut-colored eyes. only you would look for a fight like that. your head is as full of fights as an egg is full of yolk, but your head has been beaten like scrambled eggs from so much fighting. you started a fight with a man who coughed in the street because he woke up a dog that was sleeping in the sun. didn't you argue it out with your tailor for wearing one of his new suits before the right season? and with another for tying the new shoes he made with old laces? and yet you're the one who wants to teach me about restraint!"], ["if i were in the habit of fighting the way you are, my life insurance rates would be sky high.", "your life insurance? that's foolish.", "oh great, here come the capulets.", "well, well, i don't care.", "petruccio follow me closely, i'll talk to them. montagues good afternoon, gentlemen. i'd like to have a word with one of you.", "you just want one word with one of us? put it together with something else. make it a word and a blow.", "you'll find me ready enough to do that, sir, if you give me a reason.", "can't you find a reason without my giving you one?", "mercutio, you hang out with romeo."], ["\"hang out?\" who do you think we are, musicians in a band? if we look like musicians to you, you can expect to hear nothing but noise. this is my fiddlestick. i'll use it to make you dance. goddammit \"hang out!\"", "we're talking here in a public place. either go someplace private, or talk it over rationally, or else just go away. out here everybody can see us.", "men's eyes were made to see things, so let them watch. i won't move to please anybody.", "well, may peace be with you. here comes my man, the man i'm looking for.", "he's not your man. alright, walk out into a field, and he'll chase you. in that sense you can call him your \"man.\"", "romeo, there's only one thing i can call you. you're a villain.", "tybalt, i have a reason to love you that lets me put aside the rage i should feel and excuse that insult. i am no villain. so, goodbye. i can tell that you don't know who i am.", "boy, your words can't excuse the harm you've done to me. so now turn and draw your sword."], ["i disagree. i've never done you harm. i love you more than you can understand until you know the reason why i love you. and so, good capulet which is a name i love like my own name you should be satisfied with what i say.", "this calm submission is dishonorable and vile. the thrust of a sword will end this surrender. tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you go fight me?", "what do you want from me?", "good king of cats, i want to take one of your nine lives. i'll take one, and, depending on how you treat me after that, i might beat the other eight out of you too. will you pull your sword out of its sheath? hurry up, or i'll smack you on the ears with my sword before you have yours drawn.", "i'll fight you.", "noble mercutio, put your sword away.", "tybalt come on, sir, perform your forward thrust, your", "draw your sword, benvolio. let's beat down their weapons. gentlemen, stop this disgraceful fight. tybalt, mercutio, the prince has banned fighting in the streets of verona. stop, tybalt. stop, good mercutio."], ["let's get away, tybalt.", "i've been hurt. may a plague curse both your families. i'm finished. did he get away clean?", "what, are you hurt?", "yes, yes. it's a scratch, just a scratch. but it's enough. where is my page? go, boy. get me a doctor.", "have courage, man. the wound can't be that bad.", "no, it's not as deep as a well, or as wide as a church door, but it's enough. it'll do the job. ask for me tomorrow, and you'll find me in a grave. i'm done for in this world, i believe. may a plague strike both your houses. goddammit! i can't believe that dog, that rat, that mouse, that cat could scratch me to death! that braggart, punk villain who fights like he learned swordsmanship from a manual! why the hell did you come in between us? he struck me from under your arm.", "i thought it was the right thing to do."], ["take me inside some house, benvolio, or i'll pass out. may a plague strike both your families! they've turned me into food for worms. i'm done for. curse your families!", "this gentleman mercutio, a close relative of the prince and my dear friend, was killed while defending me from tybalt's slander tybalt, who had been my cousin for a whole hour! oh, sweet juliet, your beauty has made me weak like a woman, and you have softened my bravery, which before was as hard as steel.", "oh romeo, romeo, brave mercutio is dead! his brave spirit has floated up to heaven, but it was too early for him to leave life on earth.", "the future will be affected by today's terrible events. today is the start of a terror that will end in the days ahead.", "here comes the furious tybalt back again.", "he's alive and victorious, and mercutio's dead? enough with mercy and consideration. it's time for rage to guide my actions. now, tybalt, you can call me \"villain\" the way you did before. mercutio's soul is floating right above our heads. he's waiting for you to keep him company on the way up to heaven. either you, or i, or both of us have to go with him."], ["wretched boy, you hung out with him here, and you're going to go to heaven with him.", "this fight will decide who dies.", "romeo, get out of here. the citizens are around, and tybalt is dead. don't stand there shocked. the prince will give you the death penalty if you get caught. so get out of here!", "oh, i have awful luck.", "why are you waiting?", "the man who killed mercutio, which way did he go? tybalt, that murderer, which way did he run?", "tybalt is lying over there.", "tybalt get up, sir, and come with me. i command you, by the authority of the prince, to obey me."], ["where are the evil men who started this fight?", "oh, noble prince, i can tell you everything about the unfortunate circumstances of this deadly fight. over there tybalt is lying dead. he killed your relative, brave mercutio, and then young romeo killed him.", "tybalt was my nephew! he was my brother's son! oh prince, oh nephew, oh husband! oh, my nephew is dead! oh prince, as you are a man of honor, take revenge for this murder by killing someone from the montague family. oh cousin, cousin!", "benvolio, who started this fight?", "tybalt started the fight before he was killed by romeo. romeo spoke to tybalt politely and told him how silly this argument was. he mentioned that you would not approve of the fight. he said all of this gently and calmly, kneeling down out of respect. but he could not make peace with tybalt, who was in an angry mood and wouldn't listen to talk about peace. tybalt and mercutio began to fight each other fiercely, lunging at one another and dodging each other's blows. romeo cried out, \"stop, my friends. break it up.\" then he jumped in between them and forced them to put their swords down. but tybalt reached under romeo's arm and thrust his sword into brave mercutio. then tybalt fled the scene."], ["but pretty soon he came back to meet romeo, who was overcome with the desire for revenge. as quick as lightning, they started fighting. before i could break up the fight, tybalt was killed. romeo ran away when tybalt fell dead. i'm telling you the truth, i swear on my life.", "benvolio is part of the montague family. his loyalties to the montagues make him tell lies. he's not telling the truth. there were twenty montagues fighting in this awful riot, and together those twenty could only kill one man. i demand justice. you, prince, are the man who can give me justice. romeo killed tybalt. romeo must die.", "romeo killed tybalt. tybalt killed mercutio. who should now pay the price for mercutio's life?", "not romeo, prince. he was mercutio's friend. his crime did justice's job by taking tybalt's life.", "and for that crime, romeo is hereby exiled from verona. i'm involved in your rivalry. mercutio was my relative, and he lies dead because of your bloody feud. i'll punish you so harshly that you'll regret causing me this loss. i won't listen to your pleas or excuses. you can't get out of trouble by praying or crying, so don't bother. tell romeo to leave the city immediately, or else, if he is found, he will be killed. take away this body, and do what i say. showing mercy by pardoning killers only causes more murders."], ["i wish the sun would hurry up and set and night would come immediately. when the night comes and everyone goes to sleep, romeo will leap into my arms, and no one will know. beauty makes it possible for lovers to see how to make love in the dark. or else love is blind, and its best time is the night. i wish night would come, like a widow dressed in black, so i can learn how to submit to my husband and lose my virginity. let the blood rushing to my cheeks be calmed. in the darkness, let me, a shy virgin, learn the strange act of sex so that it seems innocent, modest, and true. come, night. come, romeo. you're like a day that comes during the night. you're whiter than snow on the black wings of a raven. come, gentle night. come, loving, dark night. give me my romeo. and when i die, turn him into stars and form a constellation in his image. his face will make the heavens so beautiful that the world will fall in love with the night and forget about the garish sun. oh, i have bought love's mansion, but i haven't moved in yet.i belong to romeo now, but he hasn't taken possession of me yet. this day is so boring that i feel like a child on the night before a holiday, waiting to put on my fancy new clothes."], ["oh, here comes my nurse, and she brings news. every voice that mentions romeo's name sounds beautiful. now, nurse, what's the news? is that the rope ladder romeo told you to pick up?", "yes, yes, this is the rope ladder.", "oh my, what's the news? why do you look so upset?", "oh, it's a sad day! he's dead. he's dead. he's dead! we're ruined, lady, we're ruined! what an awful day! he's gone. he's been killed. he's dead!", "can god be so jealous and hateful?", "romeo is hateful, even though god isn't. oh, romeo, romeo, who ever would have thought it would be romeo?", "what kind of devil are you to torture me like this? this is as bad as the tortures of hell. has romeo killed himself? just say \"yes\" and i will turn more poisonous than the snake with the evil eye. i will no longer be myself if you tell me romeo killed himself. if he's been killed, say \"yes.\" if not, say \"no.\" these short words will determine my joy or my pain.", "i saw the wound. i saw it with my own eyes. god bless that wound, here on his manly chest. a pitiful corpse, a bloody, pitiful corpse. pale as ashes and drenched in blood. all the dried blood was so gory. i fainted when i saw it."], ["oh, my heart is breaking. oh, my bankrupt heart is breaking. i'll send my eyes to prison, and they'll never be free to look at anything again. i'll give my vile body back to the earth. i'll never move again. my body and romeo's will lie together in one sad coffin.", "oh, tybalt, tybalt, he was the best friend i had. oh, polite tybalt, he was an honorable gentleman. i wish i had not lived long enough to see him die.", "what disaster is this? has romeo been killed, and is tybalt dead too? tybalt was my dearest cousin. romeo was even dearer to me as my husband. let the trumpets play the song of doom, because who can be alive if those two are gone?", "tybalt is dead, and romeo has been banished. romeo killed tybalt, and his punishment was banishment.", "oh god, did romeo's hand shed tybalt's blood?", "it did, it did. curse the day this happened, but it did.", "oh, he's like a snake disguised as a flower. did a dragon ever hide in such a beautiful cave? he's a beautiful tyrant and a fiendish angel! he's a raven with the feathers of the dove. he's a lamb who hunts like a wolf! i hate him, yet he seemed the most wonderful man. he's turned out to be the exact opposite of what he seemed. he's a saint who should be damned. he's a villain who seemed honorable. oh nature, what were you doing in hell? why did you put the soul of a criminal in the perfect body of a man? was there ever such an evil book with such a beautiful cover? oh, i can't believe the deepest evil lurked inside something so beautiful!"], ["there is no trust, no faith, no honesty in men. all of them lie. all of them cheat. they're all wicked. ah, where's my servant? give me some brandy. these griefs, these pains, these sorrows make me old. shame on romeo!", "i hope sores cover your tongue for a wish like that! he was not born to be shameful. shame does not belong with romeo. he deserves only honor, complete honor. oh, i was such a beast to be angry at him.", "are you going to say good things about the man who killed your cousin?", "am i supposed to say bad things about my own husband? ah, my poor husband, who will sing your praises when i, your wife of three hours, have been saying awful things about you? but why, you villain, did you kill my cousin? probably because my cousin the villain would have killed my husband. i'm not going to cry any tears. i would cry with joy that romeo is alive, but i should cry tears of grief because tybalt is dead. my husband, whom tybalt wanted to kill, is alive. tybalt, who wanted to kill my husband, is dead. all this is comforting news. why, then, should i cry? there is news worse than the news that tybalt is dead, news that makes me want to die. i would be glad to forget about it, but it weighs on my memory like sins linger in guilty minds. \"tybalt is dead, and romeo has been banished.\""], ["that banishment is worse than the murder of ten thousand tybalts. tybalt's death would be bad enough if that was all. maybe pain likes to have company and can't come without bringing more pain. it would have been better if, after she said, \"tybalt's dead,\" she told me my mother or my father, or both, were gone. that would have made me make the normal cries of sadness. but to say that tybalt's dead and then say, \"romeo has been banished.\" to say that is like saying that my father, my mother, tybalt, romeo, and juliet have all been killed, they're all dead. \"romeo has been banished.\" that news brings infinite death. no words can express the pain. where are my father and my mother, nurse?", "they are crying and moaning over tybalt's corpse. are you going to join them? i'll bring you there.", "are they washing out his wounds with their tears? i'll cry my tears for romeo's banishment when their tears are dry. pick up this rope ladder. this poor rope ladder, it's useless now, just like me, because romeo has been exiled. he made this rope ladder to be a highway to my bed, but i am a virgin, and i will die a virgin and a widow. let's go, rope ladder. nurse, i'm going to lie in my wedding bed. and death, not romeo, can take my virginity!", "go to your bedroom. i'll find romeo to comfort you. i know where he is. listen, your romeo will be here tonight. i'll go to him. he's hiding out in friar lawrence's cell."], ["oh, find him! give this ring to my true knight! and tell him to come here to say his last goodbye."], ["romeo, come out. come out, you frightened man. trouble likes you, and you're married to disaster.", "father, what's the news? what punishment did the prince announce? what suffering lies in store for me that i don't know about yet?", "you know too much about suffering. i have news for you about the prince's punishment.", "is the prince's punishment any less awful than doomsday?", "he made a gentler decision. you won't die, but you'll be banished from the city.", "ha, banishment? be merciful and say \"death.\" exile is much worse than death. don't say \"banishment.\"", "from now on, you are banished from verona. you should be able to endure this because the world is broad and wide.", "there is no world for me outside the walls of verona, except purgatory, torture, and hell itself. so to be banished from verona is like being banished from the world, and being banished from the world is death."], ["banishment is death by the wrong name. calling death banishment is like cutting off my head with a golden ax and smiling while i'm being murdered.", "oh, deadly sin! oh, rude and unthankful boy! you committed a crime that is punishable by death, but our kind prince took sympathy on you and ignored the law when he substituted banishment for death. this is kind mercy, and you don't realize it.", "it's torture, not mercy. heaven is here because juliet lives here. every cat and dog and little mouse, every unworthy animal that lives here can see her, but romeo can't. flies are healthier and more honorable and better suited for romance than romeo. they can take hold of juliet's wonderful white hand and they can kiss her sweet lips. even while she remains a pure virgin, she blushes when her lips touch each other because she thinks it's a sin. but romeo can't kiss her or hold her hand because he's been banished. flies can kiss her, but i must flee the city. flies are like free men, but i have been banished. and yet you say that exile is not death? did you have no poison, no sharp knife, no weapon you could use to kill me quickly, nothing so disgraceful, except banishment? oh friar, damned souls use the word banishment to describe hell. they howl about banishment. if you're a member of a divine spiritual order of men who forgive sins, and you say you're my friend, how do you have the heart to mangle me with the word banishment?", "you foolish madman, listen to me for a moment."], ["oh, you're just going to talk about banishment again.", "i'll give you protection from that word. i'll give you the antidote for trouble: philosophy. philosophy will comfort you even though you've been banished.", "you're still talking about \"banished?\" forget about philosophy! unless philosophy can create a juliet, or pick up a town and put it somewhere else, or reverse a prince's punishment, it doesn't do me any good. don't say anything else.", "oh, so madmen like you are also deaf.", "how should madmen hear, if wise men can't even see?", "let me talk to you about your situation.", "you can't talk about something that you don't feel. if you were as young as i am, if you were in love with juliet, if you had just married her an hour ago, if then you murdered tybalt, if you were lovesick like me, and if you were banished, then you might talk about it. you might also tear your hair out of your head and collapse to the ground the way i do right now. romeo you might kneel down and measure the grave that hasn't yet been dug.", "get up. somebody's knocking. hide yourself, good romeo."], ["i won't hide unless all the mist from my heartsick groans envelopes me like fog and conceals me from people's searching eyes.", "listen, they're still knocking! who's there? romeo romeo, get up. they'll arrest you. hold on a moment. romeo get up.", "run and hide in my study. just a minute for the love of god, why are you being so stupid? i'm coming. i'm coming.", "why are you knocking so hard? where do you come from? what do you want?", "( ) let me come in, and i'll tell you why i came. i come from lady juliet.", "welcome, then.", "oh, holy friar, oh, tell me, holy friar, where is my lady's husband? where's romeo?"], ["he's there on the ground. he's been getting drunk on his own tears.", "oh, he's acting just like juliet, just like her. oh painful sympathy! what a pitiful problem! she's lying on the ground just like him, blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. stand up. stand up. stand up if you're really a man. for juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand up. why should you fall into so deep a moan?", "nurse!", "ah sir, ah sir. well, death is the end for everybody.", "were you talking about juliet? how is she? does she think that i'm a practiced murderer because i tainted our newfound joy by killing one of her close relatives? where is she? how is she doing? what does my hidden wife say about our ruined love?", "oh, she doesn't say anything, sir. she just weeps and weeps. she falls on her bed and then starts to get up. then she calls out tybalt's name and cries \"romeo,\" and then she falls down again.", "she's calling out my name as if i were a bullet murdering her, just like i murdered her relative. tell me, friar, in what part of my body is my name embedded? tell me, so i can cut it out of myself."], ["hold on, and don't act out of desperation. are you a man? you look like a man, but your tears make you look like a woman. your wild actions resemble the irrational fury of a beast. you're a shameful woman who looks like a man or else an ugly creature who's half-man, half-beast. you have amazed me. i swear by my holy order, i thought you were smarter and more rational than this. have you killed tybalt? will you kill yourself? and would you also kill your wife, who shares your life, by committing the sin of killing yourself? why do you complain about your birth, the heavens, and the earth? life is the union of soul in body through the miracle of birth, but you would throw all that away. you bring shame to your body, your love, and your mind. you have so much natural talent, but like someone who hoards money, you use none of your talent for the right purpose not your body, not your love, not your mind. your body is just a wax figure, without the honor of a man. the love that you promised was a hollow lie. you're killing the love that you vowed to cherish. your mind, which aids both your body and your love, has mishandled both of them. you're like a stupid soldier whose gunpowder explodes because he's careless. the things you were supposed to use to defend yourself end up killing you. get up, man! your juliet is alive. it was for her that you were almost killed earlier. be happy that she's alive. tybalt wanted to kill you, but you killed tybalt. be happy that you're alive. the law that threatened your life was softened into exile. be happy about that. your life is full of blessings. you have the best sorts of happiness to enjoy."], ["but like a misbehaved, sullen girl, you're whining about your bad luck and your love. listen, listen, people who act like that die miserable. go be with your love, as it was decided at your wedding. climb up to her bedroom and comfort her. but get out of there before the night watchmen take their positions. then you will escape to the city of mantua, where you'll live until we can make your marriage public and make peace between your families. we'll ask the prince to pardon you. then we'll welcome you back with twenty thousand times more joy than you'll have when you leave this town crying. go ahead, nurse. give my regards to your lady, and tell her to hurry everybody in the house to bed. i'm sure they're all so sad that they'll be ready to sleep. romeo is coming.", "o lord, i could stay here all night listening to such good advice. educated men are so impressive! romeo my lord, i'll tell my lady you will come.", "do so, and tell my sweet to be ready to scold me.", "here, sir, this is a ring she asked me to give you. hurry up, it's getting late. romeo juliet", "this makes me feel so much better!"], ["now get out of here. good night. everything depends on this: either be out of here before the night watchmen take their positions, or leave in disguise after daybreak. take a little vacation in mantua. i'll find your servant, and he'll update you now and then on your case as it stands here. give me your hand. it's late. farewell. good night.", "i'm off to experience the greatest joy of all, but still it's sad to leave you in such a rush. farewell."], ["things have turned out so unluckily, sir, that we haven't had time to convince our daughter to marry you. listen, she loved her cousin tybalt dearly, and so did i. well, we were all born to die. it's very late, she won't be coming downstairs tonight. believe me, if you weren't here visiting me, i myself would have gone to bed an hour ago.", "these times of pain are bad times for romance. madam, good night. give my regards to your daughter.", "i will. and i'll find out what she thinks about marriage early tomorrow. tonight she is shut up in her room, alone with her sadness.", "sir paris, i'll make a desperate argument for my child's love. i think she'll do whatever i say. no, i think she'll do all that and more. i have no doubt about it. wife, visit her in her room before you go to bed. tell her about my son paris's love for her. and tell her, listen to me, on wednesday wait what day is today?", "monday, my lord.", "monday! ha, ha! well, wednesday is too soon. let it be on thursday. on thursday, tell her, she'll be married to this noble earl. will you be ready? do you think it's a good idea to rush? we shouldn't have too big a celebration we can invite a friend or two. listen, because tybalt was just killed, people might think that we don't care about his memory as our relative if we have too grand a party. therefore we'll have about half a dozen friends to the wedding, and that's it. what do you think about thursday?"], ["my lord, i wish thursday were tomorrow.", "well go on home. thursday it is, then. lady capulet visit juliet before you go to bed. get her ready, my wife, for this wedding day. paris farewell, my lord. now i'm off to bed. oh my! it's so late that we might as well call it early. good night."], ["are you going? it's still a long time until daybreak. don't be afraid. that sound you heard was the , not the lark. every night the nightingale chirps on that pomegranate-tree. believe me, my love, it was the nightingale.", "it was the lark, the bird that sings at dawn, not the nightingale. look, my love, what are those streaks of light in the clouds parting in the east? night is over, and day is coming. if i want to live, i must go. if i stay, i'll die.", "that light is not daylight, i know it. it's some meteor coming out of the sun to light your way to mantua. so stay for a while. you don't have to go yet.", "let me be captured. let me be put to death. i am content, if that's the way you want it. i'll say the light over there isn't morning. i'll say it's the reflection of the moon. i'll say that sound isn't the lark ringing in the sky. i want to stay more than i want to go. come, death, and welcome! juliet wants it this way. how are you, my love? let's talk. it's not daylight."], ["it is, it is. get out of here, be gone, go away! it's the lark that sings so out of tune, making such harsh noise. some say the lark makes a sweet division between day and night. it's not true because she separates us. . oh, now i wish they had traded voices too! because the lark's voice tears us out of each other's arms, and now there will be men hunting for you. oh, go away now. i see more and more light.", "more and more light. more and more pain for us.", "madam.", "nurse?", "your mother is coming to your bedroom. day has broken. be careful. watch out.", "then the window lets day in, and life goes out the window.", "farewell, farewell! give me one kiss, and i'll go down."], ["are you gone like that, my love, my lord? yes, my husband, my friend! i must hear from you every day in the hour. in a minute there are many days. oh, by this count i'll be many years older before i see my romeo again.", "farewell! i won't miss any chance to send my love to you.", "oh, do you think we'll ever meet again?", "i have no doubts. all these troubles will give us stories to tell each other later in life.", "oh god, i have a soul that predicts evil things! now that you are down there, you look like someone dead in the bottom of a tomb. either my eyesight is failing me, or you look pale.", "and trust me, love, you look pale to me too. sadness takes away our color. goodbye, goodbye!", "oh luck, luck. everyone says you can't make up your mind. if you change your mind so much, what are you going to do to romeo, who's so faithful? change your mind, luck. i hope maybe then you'll send him back home soon.", "hey, daughter! are you awake?"], ["who's that calling? is it my mother? isn't she up very late? or is she up very early? what strange reason could she have for coming here?", "what's going on, juliet?", "madam, i am not well.", "will you cry about your cousin's death forever? are you trying to wash him out of his grave with tears? if you could, you couldn't bring him back to life. so stop crying. a little bit of grief shows a lot of love. but too much grief makes you look stupid.", "let me keep weeping for such a great loss.", "you will feel the loss, but the man you weep for will feel nothing.", "feeling the loss like this, i can't help but weep for him forever.", "well, girl, you're weeping not for his death as much as for the fact that the villain who killed him is still alive.", "what villain, madam?", "that villain, romeo."], ["lady capulet he's far from being a villain. lady capulet may god pardon him! i do, with all my heart. and yet no man could make my heart grieve like he does.", "that's because the murderer is alive.", "yes, madam, he lies beyond my reach. i wish that no one could avenge my cousin's death except me!", "we'll have revenge for it. don't worry about that. stop crying. i'll send a man to mantua, where that exiled rogue is living. our man will poison romeo's drink, and romeo will join tybalt in death. and then, i hope, you'll be satisfied.", "i'll never be satisfied with romeo until i see him . . . dead dead is how my poor heart feels when i think about my poor cousin. madam, if you can find a man to deliver the poison, i'll mix it myself so that romeo will sleep quietly soon after he drinks it. oh, how i hate to hear people say his name and not be able to go after him. i want to take the love i had for my cousin and take it out on the body of the man who killed him.", "find out the way, and i'll find the right man. but now i have joyful news for you, girl.", "and it's good to have joy in such a joyless time. what's the news? please tell me."], ["well, well, you have a careful father, child. he has arranged a sudden day of joy to end your sadness. a day that you did not expect and that i did not seek out.", "madam, tell me quickly, what day is that?", "indeed, my child, at saint peter's church early thursday morning, the gallant, young, and noble gentleman count paris will happily make you a joyful bride.", "now, i swear by saint peter's church and peter too, he will not make me a joyful bride there. this is a strange rush. how can i marry him, this husband, before he comes to court me? please, tell my father, madam, i won't marry yet. and, when i do marry, i swear, it will be romeo, whom you know i hate, rather than paris. that's really news!", "here comes your father. tell him so yourself, and see how he takes the news.", "when the sun sets, the air drizzles dew. but at the death of my brother's son, it rains a downpour. what are you, girl? some kind of fountain? why are you still crying? will you cry forever? in one little body you seem like a ship, the sea, and the winds. your eyes, which i call the sea, flow with tears. the ship is your body which is sailing on the salt flood of your tears. the winds are your sighs. your sighs and your tears are raging. unless you calm down, tears and sighs will overwhelm your body and sink your ship. so where do things stand, wife? have you told her our decision?"], ["yes, sir, i told her. but she won't agree. she says thank you but refuses. i wish the fool were dead and married to her grave!", "wait! hold on, wife. i don't understand. how can this be? she refuses? isn't she grateful? isn't she proud of such a match? doesn't she realize what a blessing this is? doesn't she realize how unworthy she is of the gentleman we have found to be her bridegroom?", "i am not proud of what you have found for me. but i am thankful that you have found it. i can never be proud of what i hate. but i can be thankful for something i hate, if it was meant with love.", "what is this? what is this fuzzy logic? what is this? i hear you say \"proud\" and \"i thank you,\" and then \"no thank you\" and \"not proud,\" you spoiled little girl. you're not really giving me any thanks or showing me any pride. but get yourself ready for thursday. you're going to saint peter's church to marry paris. and if you don't go on your own, i'll drag you there. you disgust me, you little bug! you worthless girl! you pale face!", "shame on you! what, are you crazy?", "good father, i'm begging you on my knees, be patient and listen to me say just one thing."], ["forget about you, you worthless girl! you disobedient wretch! i'll tell you what. go to church on thursday or never look me in the face again. don't say anything. don't reply. don't talk back to me. juliet i feel like slapping you. wife, we never thought ourselves blessed that god only gave us this one child. but now i see that this one is one too many. we were cursed when we had her. she disgusts me, the little hussy!", "god in heaven bless her! my lord, you're wrong to berate her like that.", "and why, wise lady? you shut up, old woman. go blabber with your gossiping friends.", "i've said nothing wrong.", "oh, for god's sake.", "can't i say something?", "be quiet, you mumbling fool! say your serious things at lunch with your gossiping friends. we don't need to hear it.", "you're getting too angry.", "goddammit! it makes me mad. day and night, hour after hour, all the time, at work, at play, alone, in company, my top priority has always been to find her a husband. now i've provided a husband from a noble family, who is good-looking, young, well-educated. he's full of good qualities. he's the man of any girl's dreams. but this wretched, whimpering fool, like a whining puppet, she looks at this good fortune and answers, \"i won't get married. i can't fall in love. i'm too young. please, excuse me.\" well, if you won't get married, i'll excuse you. eat wherever you want, but you can no longer live under my roof. consider that. think about it. i'm not in the habit of joking. thursday is coming. put your hand on your heart and listen to my advice. if you act like my daughter, i'll marry you to my friend. if you don't act like my daughter, you can beg, starve, and die in the streets. i swear on my soul, i will never take you back or do anything for you. believe me. think about it. i won't break this promise."], ["is there no pity in the sky that can see my sadness? oh, my sweet mother, don't throw me out! delay this marriage for a month, or a week. or, if you don't delay, make my wedding bed in the tomb where tybalt lies.", "don't talk to me, because i won't say a word. do as you please, because i'm done worrying about you.", "oh god! oh nurse, how can this be stopped? my husband is alive on earth, my vows of marriage are in heaven. how can i bring those promises back down to earth, unless my husband sends them back down to me by dying and going to heaven? give me comfort. give me advice. oh no! oh no! why does heaven play tricks on someone as weak as me? what do you say? don't you have one word of joy? give me some comfort, nurse."], ["this is what i have to say: romeo has been banished. and it's a sure thing that he will never come back to challenge you. if he does come back, he'll have to sneak back undercover. then, since things are the way they are, i think the best thing to do is to marry the count. oh, he's a lovely gentleman! romeo's a dishcloth compared to him. madam, an eagle does not have eyes as green, as quick, and as fair as the eyes of paris. curse my very heart, but i think you should be happy in this second marriage, because it's better than your first. even if it's not better, your first marriage is over. or if romeo is as good as paris, romeo doesn't live here, so you don't get to enjoy him.", "are you speaking from your heart?", "i speak from my heart and from my soul too. if not, curse them both.", "amen!", "what?", "well, you have given me great comfort. go inside and tell my mother that i'm gone. i made my father angry, so i went to friar lawrence's cell to confess and be forgiven.", "alright, i will. this is a good idea."], ["that damned old lady! oh, that most wicked fiend! is it a worse sin for her to want me to break my vows or for her to say bad things about my husband after she praised him so many times before? away with you and your advice, nurse. from now on, i will never tell you what i feel in my heart. i'm going to the friar to find out his solution. if everything else fails, at least i have the power to take my own life."], ["on thursday, sir? that's very soon.", "that's how my future father-in-law capulet wants it, and i'm not dragging my feet.", "you say you don't know what the girl thinks. that's a rocky road to be riding. i don't like it.", "she's grieving too much over the death of tybalt. so i haven't had the chance to talk to her about love. romantic love doesn't happen when people are in mourning. now, sir, her father thinks it's dangerous that she allows herself to become so sad. he's being smart by rushing our marriage to stop her from crying. she cries too much by herself. if she had someone to be with her, she would stop crying. now you know the reason for the rush.", "i wish i didn't know the reason why the marriage should be slowed down. look, sir, here comes the lady walking toward my cell.", "i'm happy to meet you, my lady and my wife.", "that might be the case sir, i'm married."], ["that \"may be\" must be, love, on thursday.", "what must be will be.", "that is a certain truth.", "have you come to make confession to this father?", "if i answered that question, i'd be making confession to you.", "don't deny to him that you love me.", "i'll confess to you that i love him.", "you will also confess, i'm sure, that you love me.", "if i do so, it will mean more if i say it behind your back than if i say it to your face.", "you poor soul, your face has suffered many tears.", "the tears haven't done much because my face looked bad enough before i started to cry.", "you're treating your face even worse by saying that.", "what i say isn't slander, sir. it's the truth. and what i said, i said to my face.", "your face is mine, and you have slandered it.", "that may be the case, because my face doesn't belong to me. do you have time for me now, father, or should i come to you at evening mass?"], ["i have time for you now, my sad daughter. paris my lord, we must ask you to leave us alone.", "god forbid that i should prevent sacred devotion! juliet, i will wake you early on thursday until then, good-bye, and keep this holy kiss.", "oh, shut the door, and after you shut it, come over here and weep with me. this mess is beyond hope, beyond cure, beyond help!", "oh, juliet, i already know about your sad situation. it's a problem too hard for me to solve. i hear that you must marry this count on thursday, and that nothing can delay it.", "don't tell me that you've heard about this marriage, friar, unless you can tell me how to prevent it. if you who are so wise can't help, please be kind enough to call my solution wise. and i'll solve the problem now with this knife. god joined my heart to romeo's. you joined our hands. and before i who was married to romeo by you am married to another man, i'll kill myself. you are wise and you have so much experience. give me some advice about the current situation. or watch. caught between these two difficulties, i'll act like a judge with my bloody knife. i will truly and honorably resolve the situation that you can't fix, despite your experience and education. don't wait long to speak. i want to die if what you say isn't another solution."], ["hold on, daughter, i see some hope. but we must act boldly because the situation is so desperate. if you've made up your mind to kill yourself instead of marrying count paris, then you'll probably be willing to try something like death to solve this shameful problem. you can wrestle with death to escape from shame. and if you dare to do it, i'll give you the solution.", "oh, you can tell me to jump off the battle posts of any tower, or to walk down the crime-ridden streets of a slum. or tell me to sit in a field full of poisonous snakes. chain me up with wild bears. hide me every night in a morgue full of dead bodies with wet, smelly flesh and skulls without jawbones. or tell me to climb down into a freshly dug grave, and hide me with a dead man in his tomb. all those ideas make me tremble when i hear them named. but i will do them without fear or dread in order to be a pure wife to my sweet love.", "hold on, then. go home, be cheerful, and tell them you agree to marry paris. tomorrow is wednesday. tomorrow night make sure that you are alone. don't let the nurse stay with you in your bedroom. when you're in bed, take this vial, mix its contents with liquor, and drink. then a cold, sleep-inducing drug will run through your veins, and your pulse will stop. your flesh will be cold, and you'll stop breathing. the red in your lips and your cheeks will turn pale, and your eyes will shut. it will seem like you're dead. you won't be able to move, and your body will be stiff like a corpse. you'll remain in this deathlike state for forty-two hours, and then you'll wake up as if from a pleasant sleep. now, when the bridegroom comes to get you out of bed on thursday morning, you'll seem dead. then, as tradition demands, you'll be dressed up in your best clothes, put in an open coffin, and carried to the capulet family tomb. meanwhile, i'll send romeo word of our plan. he'll come here, and we'll keep a watch for when you wake up. that night, romeo will take you away to mantua. this plan will free you from the shameful situation that troubles you now as long as you don't change your mind, or become scared like a silly woman and ruin your brave effort."], ["give me the vial. give it to me! don't talk to me about fear.", "now go along on your way. be strong and successful in this decision. i'll send a friar quickly to mantua with my letter for romeo.", "love will give me strength, and strength will help me accomplish this plan. goodbye, dear father."], ["first servingman invite all the guests on this list.", "second servingman boy, go hire twenty skilled cooks.", "you won't get any bad cooks from me. i'll test them by making them lick their fingers.", "how can you test them like that?", "easy, sir. it's a bad cook who can't lick his own fingers. so the cooks who can't lick their fingers aren't hired.", "go, get out of here.", "we're unprepared for this wedding celebration. nurse what, has my daughter gone to see friar lawrence?", "yes, that's true.", "well, there's a chance he may do her some good. she's a stubborn little brat."], ["look, she's come home from confession with a happy look on her face.", "so, my headstrong daughter, where have you been?", "i went somewhere where i learned that being disobedient to my father is a sin. holy father lawrence instructed me to fall on my knees and beg your forgiveness. forgive me, i beg you. from now on i'll do whatever you say.", "send for the count. go tell him about this. i'll make this wedding happen tomorrow morning.", "i met the young man at lawrence's cell. i treated him with the proper love, as well as i could, while still being modest.", "well, i'm glad about this. this is good. stand up.", "this is the way it should be. i want to see the count. yes, alright, go, i say, and bring him here. now, before god, our whole city owes this friar a great debt.", "nurse, will you come with me to my closet and help me pick out the clothes and the jewelry i'll need to wear tomorrow?"], ["no, not until thursday. there's plenty of time.", "go, nurse, go with her. we'll have the wedding at the church tomorrow.", "our supplies will be short for the party. it's already almost night.", "don't worry, i will set things in motion. and everything will be alright, i promise you, wife. you should go to juliet and dress her up. i'm not going to bed tonight. leave me alone. i'll pretend to be the housewife for once.", "hey! what? they're all gone? well, i will walk by myself to count paris to get him ready for tomorrow. my heart is wonderfully happy because this troubled girl has been taken back and now will be married."], ["yes, those are the best clothes. but, gentle nurse, please leave me alone tonight. i have to say a lot of prayers to make the heavens bless me. you know that my life is troubled and full of sin.", "what, are you busy? do you need my help?", "no, madam, we've figured out the best things for me to wear tomorrow at the ceremony. so if it's okay with you, i'd like to be left alone now. let the nurse sit up with you tonight. i'm sure you have your hands full preparing for the sudden festivities.", "good night. go to bed and get some rest. i'm sure you need it.", "good-bye. only god knows when we'll meet again. there is a slight cold fear cutting through my veins. it almost freezes the heat of life. i'll call them back here to comfort me. nurse! oh, what good would she do here? in my desperate situation, i have to act alone."], ["alright, here's the vial. what if this mixture doesn't work at all? will i be married tomorrow morning? no, no, this knife will stop it. lie down right there. what if the friar mixed the potion to kill me? is he worried that he will be disgraced if i marry paris after he married me to romeo? i'm afraid that it's poison. and yet, it shouldn't be poison because he is a trustworthy holy man. what if, when i am put in the tomb, i wake up before romeo comes to save me? that's a frightening idea. won't i suffocate in the tomb? there's no healthy air to breathe in there. will i die of suffocation before romeo comes? or if i live, i'll be surrounded by death and darkness. it will be terrible. there will be bones hundreds of years old in that tomb, my ancestors' bones. tybalt's body will be in there, freshly entombed, and his corpse will be rotting. they say that during the night the spirits are in tombs. oh no, oh no. i'll wake up and smell awful odors. i'll hear screams that would drive people crazy."], ["if i wake up too early, won't i go insane with all these horrible, frightening things around me, start playing with my ancestors' bones, and pull tybalt's corpse out of his death shroud? will i grab one of my dead ancestor's bones and bash in my own skull? oh, look! i think i see my cousin tybalt's ghost. he's looking for romeo because romeo killed him with his sword. wait, tybalt, wait! romeo, romeo, romeo! here's a drink. i drink to you."], ["wait. take these keys and get more spices, nurse.", "they're calling for dates and quinces in the pastry kitchen.", "come on, wake up, wake up, wake up! the second cock crowed. the curfew-bell rang. it's three o'clock. go get the baked meats, good angelica. don't worry about the cost.", "go, you old housewife, go. go to bed, dear. you'll be sick tomorrow because you've stayed up all night.", "no, not at all. what? i've stayed up all night many times before for less important matters, and i've never gotten sick.", "yes, you've been a ladies' man in your time. but i'll make sure you don't stay up any later now.", "a jealous woman, a jealous woman!", "now, fellow, what have you got there?"], ["things for the cook, sir. but i don't know what they are.", "hurry up, hurry up.", "second servingman you, fetch logs that are drier than these. call peter, he'll show you where they are.", "i'm smart enough to find the logs myself without bothering peter.", "right, and well said. that guy's funny. he's got a head full of logs. goodness, it's daylight. the count will be here soon with music. at least he said he would. i hear him coming near.", "nurse! wife! what? hey, nurse!", "go wake juliet. go and get her dressed. i'll go and chat with paris. hey, hurry up, hurry up! the bridegroom is already here. hurry up, i say."], ["mistress! hey, mistress! juliet! i bet she's fast asleep. hey, lamb! hey, lady! hey, you lazy bones! hey, love, i say! madam! sweetheart! hey, bride! what, you don't say a word? you take your beauty sleep now. get yourself a week's worth of sleep. tomorrow night, i bet, count paris won't let you get much rest. god forgive me. alright, and amen. how sound asleep she is! i must wake her up. madam, madam, madam! yes, let the count take you in your bed. he'll wake you up, i bet. won't he? what? you're still dressed in all your clothes. but you're still asleep. i must wake you up. lady! lady! lady! oh no, oh no! help, help! my lady's dead! oh curse the day that i was born! ho! get me some brandy! my lord! my lady!", "what's all the noise in here?", "oh, sad day!", "what is the matter?", "look, look! oh, what a sad day!"], ["oh my, oh my! my child, my reason for living, wake up, look up, or i'll die with you! help, help! call for help.", "for shame, bring juliet out here. her bridegroom is here.", "she's dead, deceased, she's dead. curse the day!", "curse the day! she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!", "no! let me see her. oh no! she's cold. her blood has stopped, and her joints are stiff. she's been dead for some time. she's dead, like a beautiful flower, killed by an unseasonable frost.", "oh, sad day!", "oh, this is a painful time!", "death, which has taken her away to make me cry, now ties up my tongue and won't let me speak.", "come, is the bride ready to go to church?", "she's ready to go, but she'll never return. paris oh son! on the night before your wedding day, death has taken your wife. there she lies. she was a flower, but death deflowered her."], ["death is my son-in-law. death is my heir. my daughter married death. i will die and leave death everything. life, wealth, everything belongs to death.", "have i waited so long to see this morning, only to see this?", "accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day! this is the most miserable hour of all time! i had only one child, one poor child, one poor and loving child, the one thing i had to rejoice and comfort myself, and cruel death has stolen it from me!", "oh pain! oh painful, painful, painful day! the saddest day, most painful day that i ever, ever did behold! oh day! oh day! oh day! oh hateful day! there has never been so black a day as today. oh painful day, oh painful day!", "she was tricked, divorced, wronged, spited, killed! death, the most despicable thing, tricked her. cruel, cruel death killed her. oh love! oh life! there is no life, but my love is dead!", "despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed! why did this have to happen now? why did death have to ruin our wedding? oh child! oh child! my soul and not my child! you are dead! oh no! my child is dead. my child will be buried, and so will my joys.", "be quiet, for shame! the cure for confusion is not yelling and screaming. you had this child with the help of heaven. now heaven has her."], ["she is in a better place. you could not prevent her from dying someday, but heaven will give her eternal life. the most you hope for was for her to marry wealthy and rise up the social ladder that was your idea of heaven. and now you cry, even though she has risen up above the clouds, as high as heaven itself? oh, in this love, you love your child so badly, that you go mad, even though she is in heaven. it is best to marry well and die young, better than to be married for a long time. dry up your tears, and put your rosemary on this beautiful corpse. and, in accordance with custom, carry her to the church in her best clothes. it's natural for us to shed tears for her, but the truth is, we should be happy for her.", "all the things that we prepared for the wedding party will now be used for the funeral. our happy music will now be sad. our wedding banquet will become a sad burial feast. our celebratory hymns will change to sad funeral marches. our bridal flowers will cover a buried corpse. and everything will be used for the opposite purpose from what we intended.", "sir, you go in. and, madam, go with him. and you go too, sir paris. everyone prepare to take this beautiful corpse to her grave. the heavens hang threateningly over you for some past sin. don't disturb the heavens any more by trying to go against heaven's will.", "well, we can put away our pipes and go home."], ["honest good boys, ah, put 'em away, put 'em away. as you know, this is a sad case.", "yes, well, things could get better.", "musicians, oh, musicians, play \"heart's ease,\" \"heart's ease.\" oh, i'll die if you don't play \"heart's ease.\"", "why \"heart's ease\"?", "oh, musicians, because my heart is singing \"my heart is full of woe.\" oh, play me some happy sad song to comfort me.", "no, not a sad song. it's not the right time to play.", "you won't, then?", "no.", "then i'll really give it to you.", "what will you give us?", "no money, i swear. but i'll play a trick on you. i'll call you a minstrel.", "then i'll call you a serving-creature."], ["then i'll smack you on the head with the serving-creature's knife. i won't mess around. i'll make you sing. do you hear me?", "if you make us sing, you'll hear us.", "please, put down your knife and stop kidding around.", "so you don't like my kidding around! i'll kid you to death, and then i'll put down my knife. answer me like men.", "", "why the line \"silver sound\"? what do they mean, \"music with her silver sound\"? what do you say, simon ?", "well, sir, because silver has a sweet sound.", "that's a stupid answer! what do you say, hugh ?", "i say \"silver sound,\" because musicians play to earn silver.", "another studpid answer! what do you say, james ?", "well, i don't know what to say."], ["oh, i beg your pardon. you're the singer. i'll answer for you. it is \"music with her silver sound,\" because musicians have no gold to use to make sounds.", "", "what an annoying man, this guy is!", "forget about him, jack! come, we'll go in there. we'll wait for the mourners and stay for dinner."], ["if i can trust my dreams, then some joyful news is coming soon. love rules my heart, and all day long a strange feeling has been making me cheerful. i had a dream that my lady came and found me dead. it's a strange dream that lets a dead man think! she came and brought me back to life by kissing my lips. i rose from the dead and was an emperor. oh my! how sweet it would be to actually have the woman i love, when merely thinking about love makes me so happy.", "do you have news from verona! what is it, balthasar? do you bring me a letter from the friar? how is my wife? is my father well? how is my juliet? i ask that again because nothing can be wrong if she is well.", "then she is well, and nothing is wrong. her body sleeps in the capulet tomb, and her immortal soul lives with the angels in heaven. i saw her buried in her family's tomb, and then i came here to tell you the news. oh, pardon me for bringing this bad news, but you told me it was my job, sir."], ["is it really true? then i rebel against you, stars! you know where i live. get me some ink and paper, and hire some horses to ride. i will leave here for verona tonight.", "please, sir, have patience. you look pale and wild as if you're going to hurt yourself.", "tsk, you're wrong. leave me and do what i told you to do. don't you have a letter for me from the friar?", "no, my good lord.", "no matter. get on your way and hire those horses. i'll be with you right away.", "well, juliet, i'll lie with you tonight. let's see how. destructive thoughts come quickly to the minds of desperate men! i remember a pharmacist who lives nearby. i remember he wears shabby clothes and has bushy eyebrows. he makes drugs from herbs. he looks poor and miserable and worn out to the bone. he had a tortoise shell hanging up in his shop as well as a stuffed alligator and other skins of strange fish. there were a few empty boxes on his shelves, as well as green clay pots, and some musty seeds. there were a few strands of string and mashed rose petals on display."], ["noticing all this poverty, i said to myself, \"if a man needed some poison\" which they would immediately kill you for selling in mantua \"here is a miserable wretch who'd sell it to him.\" oh, this idea came before i needed the poison. but this same poor man must sell it to me. as i remember, this should be the house. today's a holiday, so the beggar's shop is shut. hey! pharmacist!", "who's that calling so loud?", "come here, man. i see that you are poor. here are forty ducats. let me have a shot of poison, something that works so fast that the person who takes it will die as fast as gunpowder exploding in a canon.", "i have lethal poisons like that. but it's against the law to sell them in mantua, and the penalty is death.", "you're this poor and wretched and still afraid to die? your cheeks are thin because of hunger. i can see in your eyes that you're starving. anyone can see that you're a beggar. the world is not your friend, and neither is the law. the world doesn't make laws to make you rich. so don't be poor. break the law, and take this money."], ["i agree because i'm poor, not because i want to.", "i pay you because you're poor, not because you want me to buy this.", "romeo put this in any kind of liquid you want and drink it down. even if you were as strong as twenty men, it would kill you immediately.", "apothecary there is your gold. money is a worse poison to men's souls, and commits more murders in this awful world, than these poor poisons that you're not allowed to sell. i've sold poison. you haven't sold me any. goodbye. buy yourself food, and put some flesh on your bones. i'll take this mixture, which is a medicine, not a poison, to juliet's grave. that's where i must use it."], ["holy franciscan friar! brother, hey!", "that sounds like the voice of friar john. welcome back from mantua. what does romeo say? or, if he wrote down his thoughts, give me his letter.", "i went to find another poor friar from our order to accompany me. he was here in this city visiting the sick. when i found him, the town health officials suspected that we were both in a house that had been hit with the plague. they quarantined the house, sealed up the doors, and refused to let us out. i couldn't go to mantua because i was stuck there.", "then who took my letter to romeo?", "i couldn't send it. here it is. friar lawrence i couldn't get a messenger to bring it to you either because they were scared of spreading the infection.", "unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood, the letter was not just a nice greeting. it was full of very important information. it's very dangerous that it hasn't been sent. friar john, go and get me an iron crowbar. bring it straight back to my cell."], ["brother, i'll go and bring it to you.", "now i must go to the tomb alone. within three hours juliet will wake up. she'll be very angry with me that romeo doesn't know what happened. but i'll write again to mantua, and i'll keep her in my cell until romeo comes. that poor living corpse. she's shut inside a dead man's tomb!"], ["give me your torch, boy. go away and stay apart from me. put the torch out, so i can't be seen. hide under the yew-trees over there. listen to make sure no one is coming through the graveyard. if you hear any one, whistle to me to signal that someone is approaching. give me those flowers. do as i tell you. go.", "i am almost afraid to stand alone here in the graveyard, but i'll take the risk.", "juliet sweet flower, i'm spreading flowers over your bridal bed. oh, pain! your canopy is dust and stones. i'll water these flowers every night with sweet water. or, if i don't do that, my nightly rituals to remember you will be to put flowers on your grave and weep.", "the boy is warning me that someone approaches. who could be walking around here tonight? who's ruining my rituals of true love? it's someone with a torch! i must hide in the darkness for awhile."], ["give me that pickax and the crowbar. balthasar here, take this letter. early in the morning deliver it to my father. balthasar give me the light. balthasar swear on your life, i command you, whatever you hear or see, stay away from me and do not interrupt me in my plan. i'm going down into this tomb of the dead, partly to behold my wife's face. but my main reason is to take a precious ring from her dead finger. i must use that ring for an important purpose. so go on your way. but if you get curious and return to spy on me, i swear i'll tear you apart limb by limb and spread your body parts around to feed the hungry animals in the graveyard. my plan is wild and savage. i am more fierce in this endeavor than a hungry tiger or the raging sea.", "i'll go, sir, and i won't bother you.", "that's the way to show me friendship. take this. balthasar live and be prosperous. farewell, good fellow."], ["paris despite what i said, i'll hide nearby. i'm frightened by the look on his face, and i have doubts about his intentions.", "you horrible mouth of death! you've eaten up the dearest creature on earth. now i'm going to force open your rotten jaws and make you eat another body. romeo", "romeo it's that arrogant montague, the one who's been banished. he's the one who murdered my love's cousin tybalt. they think she died with grief for that cousin. this guy has come here to commit awful crimes against the dead bodies. i'll catch him.", "romeo stop your evil work, vile montague! can you take revenge on dead bodies? condemned villain, i've caught you. obey and come with me. you must die.", "i must indeed. that's why i came here. good and noble young man, don't mess with someone who's desperate. get away from here and leave me. think about the ones who have died. let them put fear in your heart. please, young man, don't make me angry. i don't want to commit another crime. oh, go away! i swear, i love you more than i love myself. for i've come here with weapons to use against myself. don't stay here, go away. live, and from now on, say a madman mercifully told you to run away."], ["i refuse your request. i'm arresting you as a criminal.", "are you going to provoke me? alright, let's fight, boy!", "oh lord, they're fighting! i'll go call the watch.", "oh, i've been killed! if you are merciful, open the tomb and lay me next to juliet.", "alright, i will. let me look at this face. it's mercutio's relative, noble count paris! what did my man say? i was worried, so i wasn't listening to him while we were riding. i think he told me paris was about to marry juliet. isn't that what he said? or was i dreaming? or am i crazy? did i hear him say something about juliet and jump to conclusions? oh, give me your hand. both of us had such bad luck! i'll bury you in a magnificent grave.", "a grave? oh no! this is a lantern, dead paris. juliet lies here, and her beauty fills this tomb with light. dead men, lie there. you are being buried by another dead man. paris"], ["how often are men happy right before they die! they call it the lightness before death. oh, how can i call this lightness? oh, my love! my wife! death has sucked the honey from your breath, but it has not yet ruined your beauty. you haven't been conquered. there is still red in your lips and in your cheeks. death has not yet turned them pale. tybalt, are you lying there in your bloody death shroud? oh, what better favor can i do for you than to kill the man who killed you with the same hand that made you die young. forgive me, cousin! ah, dear juliet, why are you still so beautiful? should i believe that death is in love with you, and that the awful monster keeps you here to be his mistress? i don't like that idea, so i'll stay with you. and i will never leave this tomb. here, here i'll remain with worms that are your chamber-maids. oh, i'll rest here forever. i'll forget about all the bad luck that has troubled me. eyes, look out for the last time! arms, make your last embrace! and lips, you are the doors of breath. seal with a righteous kiss the deal i have made with death forever. romeo juliet come, bitter poison, come, unsavory guide! you desperate pilot, let's crash this sea-weary ship into the rocks! here's to my love! romeo . oh, that pharmacist was honest! his drugs work quickly. so i die with a kiss."], ["saint francis, help me! how often tonight have my old feet stumbled on gravestones! who's there?", "i'm a friend, a friend who knows you well.", "god bless you! tell me, my good friend, what is that light over there? the one that vainly lights up the darkness for worms and skulls without eyes? it looks to me like it's burning in the capulet tomb.", "that is where it's burning, father. my master is there. the one you love.", "who is it?", "romeo.", "how long has he been there?", "for a full half hour.", "go with me to the tomb.", "i don't dare, sir. my master doesn't know i'm still here. he threatened me with death if i stayed to look at what he was doing.", "stay, then. i'll go alone. i'm suddenly afraid. oh, i'm very scared something awful has happened."], ["as i slept under this yew-tree here, i had a dream that my master and someone else were fighting and that my master killed him.", "romeo! oh no! what is this blood that stains the stony entrance of this tomb? why are these bloody swords lying here, abandoned by their masters? next to this place of peace? romeo! oh, he's pale! who else? what, paris too? and he's covered in blood? ah, when did these horrible things happen? the lady's moving.", "oh friendly friar! where is my husband? i remember very well where i should be, and here i am. where is my romeo?", "i hear some noise. lady, come out of the tomb. a greater power than we can fight has ruined our plan. come, come away. your husband lies dead there, and paris too. come, i'll place you among the sisterhood of holy nuns. don't wait to ask questions. the watch is coming. come, let's go, good juliet, i don't dare stay any longer."], ["go, get out of here. i'm not going anywhere.", "what's this here? it's a cup, closed in my true love's hand? poison, i see, has been the cause of his death. how rude! he drank it all, and didn't leave any to help me afterward. i will kiss your lips. perhaps there's still some poison on them, to make me die with a medicinal kiss. romeo your lips are warm.", "page lead, boy. which way?", "oh, noise? then i'll be quick. oh, good, a knife! my body will be your sheath. rust inside my body and let me die. romeo", "this is the place. there, where the torch is burning.", "the ground is bloody. search the graveyard. go, some of you, arrest whoever you find.", "this is a pitiful sight! the count is dead. juliet is bleeding. her body is warm, and she seems to have been dead only a short time, even though she has been buried for two days. go, tell the prince. run to the capulets. wake up the montagues. have some others search."], ["we see the cause of all this pain. but we'll have to investigate to discover the whole story.", "here's romeo's man. we found him in the churchyard.", "hold him in custody until the prince gets here.", "here is a friar who's trembling, sighing and weeping. we took this pickax and this shovel from him, as he was walking from this side of the graveyard.", "very suspicious. hold the friar too.", "what crimes happen so early in the morning that i have to wake up before the usual time?", "what's the problem, that they cry out so loud?", "some people in the street are crying \"romeo.\" some are crying \"juliet,\" and some are crying \"paris.\" they're all running in an open riot toward our tomb."], ["what's this awful thing that everyone's crying about?", "prince, here lies count paris killed. and romeo dead. and juliet. she was dead before, but now she's warm and hasn't been dead for long.", "investigate how this foul murder came about.", "here is a friar, and dead romeo's man. they've got tools on them tools they could use to open these tombs.", "oh heavens! oh wife, look at how our daughter bleeds! that knife should be in its sheath on that montague's back, but instead it's mis-sheathed in my daughter's breast.", "oh my! this sight of death is like a bell that warns me i'm old and i'll die soon.", "come, montague. you're up early to see your son down early.", "oh, my liege, my wife died tonight. sadness over my son's exile stopped her breath. what further pain must i endure in my old age?", "look, and you'll see.", "romeo' oh, you undisciplined boy! where are your manners? it's not right for a son to push past his father on his way to the grave."], ["be quiet and hold back your remarks of outrage, until we can clear up these questions. we want to know how it started and what really happened. and then i'll be the leader of pain, and maybe i'll lead you as far as death. in the meantime, hold on, and be patient. bring forth the men under suspicion.", "i am the greatest, but i was able to do the least. i am under the most suspicion, because i was here at the time of this awful murder. and here i stand, you can question me and punish me. i have already condemned and excused myself.", "tell us what you know about this affair.", "i will be brief because i'm not going to live long enough to tell a boring story. romeo, who lies there dead, was the husband of that juliet. and she, who lies there dead, was that romeo's faithful wife. i married them; their secret wedding day was the day tybalt died. his untimely death caused the bridegroom to be banished from the city. juliet was sad because romeo was gone, not because of tybalt's death. to cure her sadness, you arranged a marriage for her with count paris. then she came to me, and, looking wild, she asked me to devise a plan to get her out of this second marriage. she threatened to kill herself in my cell if i didn't help her. so i gave her a sleeping potion that i had mixed with my special skills. it worked as planned. she seemed to everyone to be dead."], ["in the meantime i wrote to romeo and told him to come here on this awful night to help remove her from her temporary grave when the sleeping potion wore off. but the man who carried my letter, friar john, was held up by an accident. last night he gave me the letter back. so i came here alone at the hour when she was supposed to wake up. i came to take her out of her family's tomb, hoping to hide her in my cell until i could make contact with romeo. but by the time i got here, just a few minutes before juliet woke up, paris and romeo were already dead. she woke up, and i asked her to come out of the tomb with me and endure this tragedy with patience. but then a noise sent me running scared from the tomb. she was too desperate to come with me, and it seems that she killed herself. i know all of this. and her nurse knows about the marriage too. if any part of this tragedy is my fault, let my old life be sacrificed and let me suffer the most severe punishment.", "we have always known you to be a holy man. where's romeo's man? what does he have to say about this?", "i brought my master news of juliet's death. and then he rode from mantua here to this tomb. earlier this morning he asked me to give this letter to his father. when he went into the vault, he threatened me with death if i didn't leave him alone there."], ["give me the letter. i'll look at it. balthasar where is the count's page, the one who called the watch? boy, what was your master doing here?", "he came with flowers to spread on his lady's grave. and he asked me to stand far away and leave him alone, and so i did. then someone with a torch came to open the tomb. so my master drew on him. and then i ran away to call the watch.", "this letter confirms the friar's account. it describes the course of their love and mentions the news of her death. here he writes that he bought poison from a poor pharmacist. he brought that poison with him to this vault to die and lie with juliet. where are these enemies? capulet! montague! do you see what a great evil results from your hate? heaven has figured out how to kill your joys with love. because i looked the other way when your feud flared up, i've lost several members of my family as well. everyone is punished.", "oh, brother montague, give me your hand. this is my daughter's dowry. i can ask you for nothing more.", "but i can give you more. i'll raise her statue in pure gold. as long as this city is called verona, there will be no figure praised more than that of true and faithful juliet.", "the statue i will make of romeo to lie beside his juliet will be just as rich. they were poor sacrifices of our rivalry!"], ["we settle a dark peace this morning. the sun is too sad to show itself. let's go, to talk about these sad things some more. some will be pardoned, and some will be punished. there was never a story more full of pain than the story of romeo and juliet."]], [["i'll fix you, i swear.", "you thug! i'll call for a pair of !", "there are no thugs in my family, whore! read your history! we came over with richard the conqueror. oh, the hell with it. i can't be bothered. shut up!", "you won't pay for the glasses you smashed?", "no, not a penny. get out of my face. go play with yourself.", "i know my rights. i'll call a policeman.", "call them all! i have a legal right to be here. i'm not moving an inch, pal. let them come i don't care."], ["huntsman, look after my hounds. let merriman catch his breath the poor dog's foaming at the mouth. and tie up clowder together with the long-mouthed bitch. did you see, boy, how silver picked up the scent at the hedge corner, where it was weakest? i wouldn't part with that dog for twenty pounds.", "i think belman is just as good, my lord. he set up a howl when the scent was lost completely and twice picked it up where it was weakest. i swear he's the better dog.", "you're a fool. if echo were as fast, he would be worth a dozen like belman. but give them all a good dinner and look after them well. i'll go hunting again tomorrow, i think.", "i will, my lord.", "what's this? a drunkard or a corpse? check and see if he's breathing.", "he is, my lord. but this would be too cold a place to sleep if he hadn't warmed himself with ale.", "it's disgusting, sleeping that way like a pig in the gutter! alas, grim death, how vile and ugly your near-twin, sleep, is! gentlemen, i think i'll play a trick on this lout. what do you think? say we were to carry him to one of the bedrooms, put fresh clothes on him and rings on his fingers, lay out a wonderful feast by his bed, and have servants in fancy dress near him when he wakes up wouldn't the poor tramp be confused?"], ["i don't think he'd have any choice, my lord.", "when he woke, he wouldn't know where he was.", "it would be just like a nice daydream or fantasy. well, take him on up and we'll try to pull it off. carry him to my best room gently, so he doesn't wake and hang all my erotic paintings around him. bathe his filthy head with warm, scented water. burn fragrant wood to give the room a pleasant smell, and have musicians at hand, ready to produce sweet, soothing sounds when he awakes. you want to be ready in case he speaks. if he does, bow low and say deferentially, \"what would your honor have us do?\" have one servant wait on him with a basin of rosewater (throw in some petals), have another servant carry a pitcher, and a third a cloth. say, \"would your lordship care to freshen up?\" have someone standing by with expensive clothes, and ask him what he'd care to wear. have another servant tell him about the dogs and horses that he owns and that his wife is grief-stricken over his illness. convince him that he has been out of his mind and when he says he's out of his mind tell him he's mistaken and that he is in fact a mighty lord. do this make it convincing and we'll have fun. it could work if it's done subtly.", "my lord, i promise we will play our parts so skillfully that he will believe everything we tell him."], ["carry him gently to bed, and every man be ready at his post when he awakes.", "go, lad, and find out what the trumpet's sounding for.", "it's probably some noble gentleman stopping off in mid-journey, thinking to spend the night here.", "well, who is it?", "sir, it's a troupe of actors who want to perform for your lordship.", "have them come in.", "you are welcome here, my friends.", "we thank your honor.", "were you thinking of spending the night here?", "yes, if that would be all right with your lordship.", "by all means. i remember this fellow he once played the eldest son of a farmer. it was the play in which you wooed the gentlewoman so successfully. i have forgotten your name, but you were well cast in the role and played it convincingly."], ["i believe your honor is thinking of a character called soto.", "yes, that was it. you gave an excellent performance. well, this is very fortunate, your arriving just at this moment. i happen to be planning a little entertainment and could really use your services. there is a particular lord who will watch you perform tonight. i'm a little worried, though because his honor has never seen a play before that his odd behavior may strike you as funny. you might not be able to control your laughter and you might offend him. i warn you, he's sensitive. the slightest smile provokes him.", "don't worry. we'll restrain ourselves no matter how bizarrely he behaves.", "go, lad, and take them to the pantry. make them feel welcome and see to it that they have everything they require.", "you, fellow, go fetch my page, bartholomew, and dress him up like a noble lady. when you've finished, bring him to the drunkard's room, address him as \"madam,\" bow to him and treat him with all-round respect and deference, as though he were the lady of the house. give him this message: if he wants to please me, he will conduct himself like a member of the aristocracy, mimicking the kind of behavior he's seen noble ladies use toward their husbands."], ["that's just how i want him to behave toward the drunkard, speaking in a low, soft voice and in humble, courteous tones and saying fancy stuff like, \"what does your honor wish to command your lady, your humble wife, to do to show her devotion and demonstrate her love?\" tell him to give the drunkard fond embraces and alluring kisses, and lay his head on the other man's breast, weeping like a woman overjoyed to see a husband restored to health who for the last seven years has imagined he was no better than a poor, pathetic beggar. the boy may lack a woman's gift for weeping at will, so it might be good to have an onion handy, hidden in a handkerchief. that'll make his eyes stream. get this done as quickly as you can. i'll give you more instructions later.", "i know the boy will be a convincing gentlewoman, taking up her exact walk and talk and gentle gestures. i can't wait to hear him call the drunkard \"husband,\" and to watch my men smother their laughter as they pay their respects to this simple peasant. i'll go and coach them. my presence may put a damper on their high spirits, which might otherwise get out of control."], ["for god's sake, would someone bring me a mug of beer!", "wouldn't your lordship prefer some imported wine?", "would your honor like to try this dried fruit?", "what garment would your honor like to wear today?", "i'm christopher sly. don't call me \"your honor\" and \"your lordship.\" i've never had imported wine in my life, and if you want to bring me something \"dried,\" try beef jerky. why ask me what \"garment\" i'll wear? i have no more jackets than i have backs, no more leggings than i have legs, and no more shoes than i have feet in fact, sometimes i have shoes than feet, as i'm not sure the ones where my toes stick out can be called \"shoes.\"", "may heaven put an end to this foolish fantasy of your honor's! how terrible that a man of your influence and noble family, with so much wealth and an excellent reputation, should be infected with such a horrible illness!"], ["what, are you trying to make me crazy? i'm christopher sly, son of old sly of barton-on-heath, a peddler by birth, a by trade, a keeper of trained bears by bad luck, and now, by present profession, a tinker. go ask marian hacket, the fat innkeeper of wincot. she knows me! she'll tell you about the tab i've run up fourteen pence just for ale. if she doesn't, call me the biggest liar in christendom. i'm not crazy! just look at how", "oh, this is why your poor wife is mourning!", "and this is why your servants hang their heads in sorrow!", "and this is why your relatives never visit, frightened away by this unnatural insanity of yours. oh noble lord, consider your lineage. try to recall your former state of mental health and forget these crass, lowly desires. look how your servants wait on you, each one ready to do whatever you command. would you care to hear some music? listen! that's playing.", "and those birds you hear twenty caged nightingales. do you want to sleep? we'll have a couch made up that's softer and more fragrant even than the bed of lustful . say you want to take a walk, and we'll sprinkle the ground with flowers. or do you want to go horseback riding? your horses will be adorned with harnesses decorated in gold and pearls. do you like hawking? you have hawks that can soar higher than the morning lark. or do you want to hunt? your hounds will make the sky echo with their high-pitched voices."], ["if you care to hunt rabbits, your greyhounds are as swift as healthy stags and faster than young deer.", "do you like pictures? we'll be right back with one of stretched out beside a rushing brook, with venus spying on him, hidden in rushes that seem to move and undulate with her lustful sighs, like grass waving in the wind.", "there's one that shows io as a maid, before she was turned into a cow, in which tricks and takes her. it's so realistic, it seems to be happening right before your eyes.", "there's one of running through the woods, her legs so scratched by thorns that apollo himself would weep at the sight. you'll swear the blood and tears are real.", "you are nothing less than a lord. you have a noble wife who is much more beautiful than any other woman in this declining age.", "before she began shedding tears all over her lovely face, she was the fairest creature in the world and even now she has no equal."], ["i'm really a lord? and do i really have a wife like that? is a dream? or has everything up till now been a dream? i don't seem to be asleep: i can see and hear and speak. i can smell sweet smells and feel things that are soft to the touch. i'll be damned! i guess i really am a lord and not a tinker, and not christopher sly, either. well, bring my wife to me. oh, and don't forget the beer.", "would your mightiness care to wash his hands? we're overjoyed to see you sane again. if only you had a clearer memory of who you are! these past fifteen years you have been living in a dream, and even when you were awake, it was as though you slept.", "fifteen years! that's some nap. but i never spoke the whole time?", "oh yes, you spoke, my lord, but total nonsense. for instance, you'd be lying here in this comfortable room, but you'd that you were being thrown out of some tavern and would shout at a landlady about how you were going to take her to court for cheating you. sometimes you would call out for one cicely hacket.", "yes, the landlady's maid.", "but sir, there is no such house, no such maid, and no such men as you have dreamed up, like a certain stephen sly and one old john naps of greece, a peter turph, one \"henry pimpernell,\" and twenty more men of this sort who never actually existed."], ["well, thank god i'm cured!", "amen.", "i thank you all. you won't regret this.", "how is my noble lord?", "not bad, actually. this is all quite pleasant. where is my wife?", "here, noble lord. what is your wish with regard to her?", "you call yourself my wife, yet you don't call me \"husband\"? it's my men who should call me \"lord.\" i'm your man, your fellow.", "my husband my lord and my lord is my husband. for i am your all-obedient wife.", "yes, i see. lord what should i call her?", "\"madam.\"", "\" alice?\" or \"madam joan?\"", "just \"madam.\" that's how noblemen address their wives."], ["madam wife, they say i've been dreaming or asleep for more than fifteen years.", "yes, and it seemed twice as long to me, having been kept from your bed that whole time.", "that's too long. servants, leave her and me alone. now, madam, undress and come to bed.", "thrice noble lord, i beg you to excuse me for another night or two or at least until nightfall. your doctors have expressly forbidden me to sleep with you, as there's a risk that you might have a relapse. i hope this explanation will stand as my excuse.", "well, something's standing up. i'm not sure i can wait that long. still, i'd hate to see my former dreams return. so i wait, however may feel about it.", "your honor's actors, hearing of your recovery, have come to perform a pleasing comedy for you and your doctors approve wholeheartedly. they say that too much suffering has made your blood coagulate, and that sadness leads to madness. so they think it's a good idea for you to watch a play and direct your thoughts toward laughter and merriment two strong preventive medicines that foster long life."], ["okay, bring on the play. but what's a \" ?\" some sort of christmas skit or display of acrobatics?", "no, my good lord, this is nicer stuff.", "what, like stuff from a house?", "no, it's a story.", "well, let's watch it. come, madam wife, sit here beside me. let's forget our cares. we're not getting any younger."], ["well, tranio, here we are in fertile lombardy, garden of italy, about to fulfill my lifelong dream. you know how i've always longed to see the fair city of padua, famous for its arts and letters, and now, thanks to my father's generosity, here i am with his blessing and your good company. so, my trusty servant and you've never let me down why don't we settle here for a time to institute a course of study, a really rigorous curriculum. i was born in pisa, famous for its serious citizens, like my father before me; my father, vincentio, a successful, world-traveled merchant, was one of the . it's only fitting that i, his son, reared in florence, should concentrate on adding more virtuous deeds to my father's own, stacking them on top of his wealth. for this reason, tranio, i'll study ethics and for the time being, anyway pursue those areas of that teach a man how to achieve happiness through virtue. what do you think of all this? leaving pisa for padua, a little like a thirsty man who turns from a puddle to a vast lake he can drink from."], ["pardon me, gentle master. as usual, i'm in complete agreement with you about everything, and glad that you still relish the idea of studying philosophy and let me add that i admire your virtue and your moral discipline. that said, let's not become total or unfeeling blocks of wood and give up all thought of pleasure. we don't want to become so focused on that we forget to read ovid. here's my thought: practice your logic as you chat with your friends, and your rhetoric in ordinary conversation. use music and poetry to excite your senses. math and metaphysics well, i'd play them by ear, spending only as much time on them as you can stand. there's nothing to be gained from things we take no pleasure in. what i'm saying, sir, is this: study what you most enjoy.", "thanks, tranio. that's good advice. now if only biondello would get here, we could find a nice place to stay where the friends we'll make here in padua could visit us. wait! who are all these people?", "maybe it's a parade to welcome us to town, master.", "enough, gentlemen! you can't influence me on this point. you know how i feel. i'm determined not to permit my younger daughter to marry until i have a husband for the elder one. i've long regarded you both as good friends. therefore, if either of you is partial to katherina, he shall have my permission to court her freely."], ["her, you mean. she's too much for me. how about you, hortensio? are you still interested in marrying?", "baptista may i ask, sir, if it's your intention to publicly humiliate me, showing me off like a whore in front of these suitors?", "we're not your suitors, that's for sure! not until you improve your temper, girl!", "don't worry, i couldn't care less. the only possible interest i could take in you would be to hit you on the head with a stool, paint your face with blood, and make a fool out of you.", "may the good lord keep me safe from all women like her!", "me too, lord!", "lucentio wow! this'll be fun to watch! this girl is either completely crazy or incredibly willful.", "tranio but her sister seems quiet and well behaved, as a young girl should be. shhh, tranio."], ["lucentio indeed, master. let's keep quiet and watch.", "gremio hortensio gentlemen, since i'd like to make good on what i've said bianca, go inside. and don't be unhappy, my dear. whatever happens, you know i'll never love you less.", "what a spoiled little brat. she'd make herself cry now, if she could think of a reason.", "sister, be happy in my unhappiness. sir, i will humbly obey you. i'll take comfort in my books and music, reading and practicing my instruments.", "listen tranio! that's voice you hear.", "signior baptista, will you really be this cruel? i regret that our goodwill should cause bianca unhappiness.", "why are you locking her away because of this fiend from hell, signor baptista? why does the one daughter have to be punished for the other's mouth?", "gentlemen, i've made my decision. that's all there is to it. go inside, bianca."], ["and because i know how fond she is of music, playing her instruments, and poetry, i plan to hire live-in tutors for her. if either of you gentlemen knows anyone who would be suitable for the job, send him to me. i'll pay well for good teachers. i don't stint when it comes to educating my children. goodbye, gentlemen. katherina, you may stay. i have things to discuss with bianca.", "stay out here? i don't think so! am i to be dictated to, like a child? told when to come and where to go? no.", "you can go straight to hell! what you have to offer is nothing anyone wants. hortensio, our desire to be married isn't so great that we can't wait this out patiently. it's tough on both of us, but i guess we'll live. so long. but to prove my love for bianca, i'm going to see if i can find a good tutor to give her lessons in the things she enjoys. if i do, i'll send him to her father.", "i'll do the same. but wait don't go just yet, signior gremio. i know we've never exactly been allies, but it might be in both our interests, if you think about it, to put our heads together about one particular thing. that is, if we ever want to return to being rivals for bianca's love."], ["and that would be ?", "to find a husband for her sister.", "a husband? you mean a devil!", "i mean a husband.", "i say a devil. do you really think there's a man fool enough to marry into hell however rich the father is?", "oh, i don't know. just because we wouldn't want to put up with her tantrums, that doesn't mean there aren't guys who would, if we could find them. guys who'd take her with all her faults, provided there were enough money involved.", "i don't know. all i know is rather endure a public whipping every morning than put up with her even with a big dowry.", "the two choices are about equal, it's true. but come, since we must be friends in the face of this new obstacle, let's work together to find a husband for baptista's elder daughter, and thus free his younger daughter to have a husband, too. then we can go back to fighting with each other. happy the man that claims you, sweet bianca! and may the best man win. what do you say, signior gremio?", "agreed. this imaginary suitor for katherina i'd buy him the best horse in padua if he'd get here quickly, woo her, marry her, take her to bed, and rid the house of her. let's go."], ["sir, is it possible that a person could fall in love so suddenly?", "oh, tranio, until it happened to me, i never would have thought it possible. but now i confess it openly to you, tranio. you are to me what anna, sister, was to the queen of carthage. i confide in you. i tell you, tranio, i'm on fire, in agony. i'll die if i can't have this modest young girl for my wife. advise me, tranio i know you can. help me, tranio i know you will.", "master, this is no moment to lecture you. the heart won't be reasoned with. if love has touched you, love has touched you end of story. but, as the roman terence advises, now that you're a captive, it's time to buy back your freedom at the lowest possible cost.", "yes, you're right. please go on. i feel better already, and i know there's more good advice where that came from.", "master, you were so focused on the girl herself, i wonder if you missed the main point here.", "oh no! i saw sweetness and beauty in her face of the kind that humbled great . he saw it in europa that time she brought him to his knees in crete."], ["that's all you noticed? you missed the part where her sister began to scold her and made such a ruckus that human ears could hardly stand it?", "tranio, i saw her coral-pink lips move and perfume the air with her breath. i saw nothing in her except what is virtuous and lovely.", "i think it's time to rouse him from his trance. wake up, sir! if you love the girl, it's time to figure out how to win her. the way things stand, her older sister is so bitchy and difficult that the father can't wait to get rid of her. but until he does, your sweetheart is grounded, locked up at home and not allowed any suitors.", "oh, tranio, what a cruel father he is. still, did you notice how ready he was to hire good tutors for her?", "i did and now i've got it!", "tranio, i think i've got it!", "i'll bet we're both thinking the same thing, master.", "tell me your idea first.", "you will pretend to be a schoolmaster and offer to teach the girl. is that your plan?", "it is. do you think it would work?"], ["no, not a chance. you're supposed to be here in padua studying. so who would fill in for you pretend to be vincentio's son, live in his house, pore over his books, welcome his friends, and wine and dine his fellow expatriates from pisa?", "enough! don't worry, i have it all figured out. no one has seen us yet, and no one knows what we look like which of us is master and which servant. it's obvious: will be tranio live in my house, instruct the servants and do everything in my place just as i would. i, meanwhile, will impersonate some other made-up fellow some guy from florence or naples, or some poor guy from pisa. there! that's a plan. take off what you're wearing and put on my hat and cloak.", "here comes biondello. where have you been, boy?", "where have been? where are has tranio stolen your clothes, master? or have you stolen his? have you both stolen each other's? please, what's going on?", "come here, boy. it's no time for jokes: sober up. tranio and i have traded clothes to save my life. i killed a man in a fight since we came ashore, and i'm worried someone saw me. while i make my escape, i need you to wait on tranio as though he were me. understand?", "of course, sir. not a word.", "and you're not to utter a syllable of tranio's name. \"tranio\" is now \"lucentio.\"", "lucky for him. wish i could say the same.", "i'd second your wish if it automatically meant that lucentio could have baptista's youngest daughter. this is for your master's sake, not mine. so watch your step when there are other people around. when we're by ourselves you can call me \"tranio.\" everywhere else, address me as your master lucentio."]], [["boatswain!", "i'm here, sir. how can i help you?", "my good boy, give the other sailors a pep talk and do it fast, before we're shipwrecked. hurry, hurry!", "come on, men! that's the way to do it! quickly! quickly! take in the upper sail. listen to the master's orders. blow your heart out, storm! so long as we have enough room to avoid running aground!", "be careful, good boatswain! where's the master? make these men work.", "please stay below deck, sir.", "where's the master, boatswain?"], ["he's busy, can't you hear him giving orders? you're getting in the way of our work. stay in your cabins. you're helping the storm, not us.", "don't get wound up, my good man.", "i'm only wound up because the sea's wound up. now get out of here! do you think these waves care anything about kings and officials? go to your cabins and be quiet! don't bother us up here.", "just remember who you've got on board with you, good man.", "nobody i care about more than myself. you're a king's advisor. if you can order the storm to calm down, we can all put down our ropes and rest. go ahead, use your authority. if you can't do it, be grateful you've lived this long and go wait to die in your cabin, if it comes to that. harder, men! now get out of our way, i'm telling you.", "i feel a lot better after talking to this guy. he doesn't look like a person who would drown he looks like he was born to be . i hope he lives long enough to be hanged. the rope that hangs him will do more good than all the ropes on this ship, since it'll guarantee he stays alive through this storm. but if he's not destined to die by hanging, then our chances don't look too good."], ["bring down that top sail! fast! lower, lower! let the ship sail close to the wind.", "damn those men shouting down there! they're louder than the storm or us sailors.", "oh, not you again. what do you want? should we all give up and drown? do you want to sink?", "oh, go to hell, you loud-mouthed bastard!", "well, get to work, then.", "just die, you lowlife! go ahead and die, you nasty, rude bastard!you're more scared of drowning than we are.", "yes, i guarantee he won't drown even if this ship were as fragile as an eggshell and as leaky as a menstruating woman.", "turn the ship to the wind! set the sails and let her go out to sea again!", "it's no use! pray for your lives! we're done for!"], ["what, we're going to die?", "the king and the prince are praying. let's go join them, since whatever happens to them happens to us too.", "i'm out of patience.", "yes, we've been cheated out of our lives by a bunch of drunken, incompetent sailors. this bigmouth jerk here ( boatswain i hope you drown ten times over!", "he'll still die by hanging, not drowning, even if every drop of water in the sea tries to swallow him.", "god have mercy on us! the ship's breaking up! goodbye, wife and kids! goodbye, brother! we're breaking up, we're breaking up!", "let's all sink with the king.", "let's say goodbye to him."], ["right now i'd give a thousand of sea for one little acre of dry ground: barren weed patch, anything at all. what's destined to happen will happen, but i'd give anything to be dry when i die."], ["dear father, if you caused this terrible storm with your magic powers, please put an end to it. the sky's so dark it looks like it would rain down boiling hot tar if the sea weren't swelling up to the sky to put its fire out. oh, i suffered along with all the men i watched suffer! a fine ship, with some good people in it, i'm sure, smashed to pieces. their dying shouts broke my heart! the poor people died. if i'd been a god i would've let the sea sink inside the earth before it had a chance to swallow up that ship and all the people it was carrying.", "calm down. there's nothing to get upset about. no harm was done.", "oh, what a horrible day!", "there was no harm, i'm telling you. everything i've done has been for you, my dear daughter. you don't know what you are, since you don't know who i am or where i come from, or that i'm better than merely prospero, your humble father who lives in a poor little shack.", "it never occurred to me to imagine there was anything more to know."], ["it's time for you to know the whole story. give me a hand and help me off with this magic cloak.", "so, lie there, my magic. miranda wipe your eyes. take comfort. i arranged the horrible sight of this shipwreck, which moved you to such pity, so carefully that not a single person was hurt no, not so much as a hair on anyone's head was destroyed in the ship that you saw sink. sit down. it's time for you to know more. ( )", "you've often started to tell me who i am, but then suddenly stopped, leaving me asking questions that never get answered, telling me, \"wait. not yet.\"", "well, the time has come. this is the moment for you to listen hard and pay close attention. can you remember the time before you came to live in this shack? i doubt it, since you weren't even three at the time.", "sure i can, father.", "what do you remember? a house, a person? tell me anything you remember."], ["my memory is hazy, more like a dream than a recollection. didn't i use to have four or five women taking care of me?", "indeed you did, and more besides, miranda. but how is it possible that you still remember this, through all the darkness of the past? if you remember your life before you came here, you may also remember how you got here.", "no, that i don't remember.", "twelve years ago, miranda, twelve years ago your father was the duke of milan, a powerful prince.", "aren't you my father?", "your mother was extremely virtuous, and she said you were my daughter. and your father was duke of milan, and you were his heir, a princess.", "good lord! what evil things were done to us that we were driven here? or was it a blessing that we came here?", "both, both, my girl. we were pushed out of power by evil deeds, as you call them. but we were blessed in being helped toward this island."], ["oh, it breaks my heart to think how painful it must be for you to recall all this, things that i can't remember. but please tell me more.", "my brother, your uncle antonio just listen to this (i still can't believe a brother could be so disloyal!) my brother whom aside from you i loved more than anyone else in the world, i trusted to run my state, which at that time was the strongest in the land, and prospero the number one duke, famous for my dignity and my education. since i was so drawn to studying things like logic, grammar, geometry, and astronomy, i let my control of the government slide a bit, being too wrapped up in my occult books. your disloyal uncle are you paying attention?", "i'm hanging on every word.", "once antonio got the knack of granting certain requests, denying others, promoting some officials and keeping down those who were getting too ambitious, he won over the people who used to be mine, or changed them remade them, you might say. since he had control over the whole government and everyone in it, he soon made everyone sing his own song whichever song he happened to like. he became like the ivy that sticks to the side of the tree, and sucked my vitality out of me. you're not paying attention.", "oh, yes i am, father."], ["please listen to me carefully. as i neglected practical matters, being totally dedicated to solitude and to improving my mind with subjects more valuable than most people imagine, i was so shut away from the world that i unwittingly stirred up evil wishes in my disloyal brother. my deep trust in him made him deeply untrustworthy, arousing in him a treachery as big as my trust was my trust which had no limit, an infinite confidence. with antonio possessing such powers and wealth, coming not only from my income but also from his ability to take whatever my authority allowed him to take, antonio started to believe that he was the duke, like some liar who begins to believe in his own lie. he put on the face of royalty, with all the rights that go along with it. with his ambition growing like this do you hear what i'm saying?", "what you're saying could cure deafness, father. of course i hear it.", "to make his political performance absolutely perfect, he simply had to become the duke of milan himself. my library was a large enough dukedom for me. so, now antonio judges me incapable of carrying out my duties. he's so power-hungry that he allies himself with the king of naples, agreeing to pay him a regular annual sum, swear subservience to him, and put the dukedom of milan never subservient to anyone before! under the humiliating control of naples.", "good heavens!"], ["think about that, and about what followed afterward. then tell me if antonio can be called a brother.", "it would be wrong for me to think poorly of my grandmother. good women sometimes give birth to bad sons.", "now listen to the agreement they made. the king of naples, my arch-enemy, listens to my brother's request, which was that the king, in exchange for the respect and money paid to him, would get rid of me and make my brother duke of milan instead. a treacherous army was gathered, and one fateful night at midnight, antonio opened the gates of milan, and in the pitch black had his officers rush out me and you, my dear daughter. you were crying.", "how awful! i can't remember how i cried then, but i'll cry all over again. this story breaks my heart.", "just listen a little more, and i'll bring you up to date about the present situation, which is the whole reason i'm telling you this story in the first place.", "why didn't they just kill us that night?"], ["good question, my girl. my story does raise that question. the answer, my dear, is that they didn't dare, because the people of milan loved me too much. the had to disguise their bloody intentions. so, to make a long story short, they hurried us onto a ship and carried us a number of miles out to sea, where they prepared a rotten carcass of a boat, with no sails or masts or ropes, which even the rats had abandoned. they tossed us in the water to cry to the sea that roared back at us, to sigh into the winds that sighed right back at us in pity.", "god, what a burden on you i must have been!", "no, my dear, you were a little angel who kept me going. you smiled with a strength you must have gotten from heaven, while i cried salty tears into the salty sea, and groaned at our situation. your smile sustained my spirits against whatever would come our way.", "how did we manage to get ashore?"], ["with god's help. we had a little food and fresh water that a nobleman from naples, gonzalo, had given us out of the kindness of his heart. he had been chosen to carry out the plan of putting us to sea. he also gave us clothes, linen, and other necessities that have been of great help. knowing how much i loved my books, he gave me some books from my library that i value more than my dukedom.", "i wish i could see that man someday!", "now i'll stand up. sit still and listen to the last of our sad sea adventures. we arrived here on this island, where i, acting as your teacher, have given you a better education than most princesses get, princesses who have less careful tutors, who spend their time instead on empty fun.", "may god thank you for it. but please, father the question is still nagging at me why did you conjure up this storm?", "you should know this: much luck is on my side, and my enemies have happened to wreck their ship on this island. as i see it, my fate hangs on this lucky event, and if i handle it wrong, i'll suffer for the rest of my life. now, no more questions."], ["you look sleepy. it's a nice hazy feeling, so give in to it. i know you have no choice.", "come on, servant, come. i'm ready now. come here, ariel.", "humble greetings, great master! worthy sir, greetings! your wish is my command, whatever you want. if you want me to fly, to swim, to jump into fire, to ride the clouds in the sky, ariel will get right to the task.", "spirit, did you carry out the storm just as i ordered?", "down to the last detail. i boarded the king's ship, and in every corner of it, from the deck to the cabins, i made everyone astonished and terrified. sometimes i appeared in many places at once. on the top sail and main mast i flamed in different spots, then i came together into a single flame. i flashed about faster than lightning. the fire and deafening cracks seemed to overwhelm even the god of the sea himself, making him tremble underwater.", "good spirit! who could ever be so steady and strong that a disturbance like that wouldn't make him crazy?"], ["everyone there got a little crazy and pulled some desperate stunts. everyone except the sailors dove into the sea, leaving behind the ship that i had set on fire. the king's son, ferdinand, with his hair standing straight up it looked like reeds, not hair was the first person to jump, shouting, \"hell is empty, and all the devils are here!\"", "good job! but was this near the shore?", "very near, my master.", "but are they all safe, ariel?", "nobody was hurt in the slightest. even their clothes are unstained, and look fresher than before the storm. i've separated them into groups around the island, just as you ordered. i sent the king's son off by himself to a faraway nook on the island, where he's sitting now sighing, with his arms crossed like this. ( .)", "tell me what you did with the king's ship, the sailors, and the other ships.", "the king's ship is safely in the harbor, hidden in that deep cove where you once summoned me to bring back dew from the stormy bermuda islands."], ["the sailors are all below deck, sleeping both from their labor and from a magic spell i cast over them. as for the rest of the ships, i scattered them, and they've gathered again in the mediterranean, sailing sadly home to naples, believing that they witnessed the shipwreck and death of their great king.", "ariel, you've done your work exactly as i ordered. but there's more work to be done. what time is it?", "past noon.", "at least two hours past. we can't waste time between now and six o'clock.", "is there more work to do? since you're giving me new assignments, let me remind you what you promised me but haven't come through with yet.", "what? you're in a bad mood? what could you possibly ask for?", "my freedom.", "before your sentence has been completed? don't say anything else.", "i beg you, remember the good work i've done for you, and how i've never lied to you, never made mistakes, and never grumbled in my work. you promised to take a full year off my sentence."], ["have you forgotten the torture i freed you from?", "no.", "you have forgotten, and you think it's a burden when i ask you to walk through the ocean, or run on the north wind, or do business for me underground when the earth's frozen solid.", "no, i don't, sir.", "you lie, you nasty, ungrateful thing! have you forgotten the horrid witch sycorax, stooped over with old age and ill will? have you forgotten her?", "no, sir.", "you have. where was she born? speak. tell me.", "in algiers, sir.", "oh, was she now? i'll have to tell the story again every month, since you seem to forget it. this damned witch sycorax was kicked out of algiers for various witching crimes too terrible for humans to hear about. but for one reason they refused to execute her. isn't that true?", "yes, sir."], ["this sunken-eyed hag was brought here pregnant and left by the sailors. you, my slave, were her servant at the time, as you admit yourself. you were too delicate to carry out her horrible orders, and you refused. in a fit of rage she locked you up in a hollow pine tree, with the help of her powerful assistants, and left you there for twelve years. during that time she died, and you were trapped, moaning and groaning as fast as the blades of a wheel strike the water. at that time there were no people here. this island was not honored with a human being except for the son that sycorax gave birth to here, a freckled baby born of an old hag.", "yes, caliban, her son.", "that's right, you stupid thing. caliban, who now serves me. you know better than anyone how tortured you were when i found you. your groans made wolves howl, and even made bears feel sorry for you. nobody but the damned souls of hell deserves the spell that sycorax put on you and couldn't undo. it was my magic that saved you when i arrived on the island and heard you, making the pine tree open and let you out.", "thank you, master.", "if you complain any more, i'll split an oak tree and lock you up in it till you've howled for twelve years."], ["please forgive me, master. i'll be obedient and do all my tasks without complaining.", "do that, and i'll set you free in two days.", "that's noble of you, master. what shall i do for you? just tell me. what shall i do?", "go disguise yourself as a sea nymph. be invisible to everyone except yourself and me. take this garment, put it on, and then come back here. hurry, go!", "miranda wake up, my dear. wake up. you've slept well. wake up.", "your strange story made me groggy.", "shake off your sleepiness. come on. we'll go visit caliban, my slave who always talks to us so nastily.", "an evil one, father. i don't like him."], ["but even so, we can't do without him. he builds our fires, gets our firewood, and does all kinds of useful things for us. hey! caliban! pile of dirt! say something.", "you've got enough firewood already.", "come out, i order you. there's other work for you to do. come on, you turtle!", "what a fine sight! my dear clever ariel, listen carefully. ariel", "my lord, i'll do it right away.", "caliban you horrible slave, with a wicked hag for a mother and the devil himself for a father, come out!", "i hope you both get drenched with a dew as evil as what my mother used to collect with a crow's feather from the poison swamps. may a hot southwest wind blow on you and cover you with blisters all over."], ["i'll give you cramps for saying that horrible pains in your sides that will keep you from breathing. i'll send goblins out at night to work their nasty deeds on you. you'll be pricked all over, and it'll sting like bees.", "i have to eat my dinner now. this island belongs to me because sycorax, my mother, left it to me. but you've taken it from me. when you first got here, you petted me and took care of me, you would give me water with berries in it, and you taught me the names for the sun and the moon, the big light and the smaller light that burn in daytime and nighttime. i loved you back then. i showed you all the features of the island, the freshwater springs, the saltwater pits, the barren places and the fertile ones. i curse myself for doing that! i wish i could use all the magic spells of sycorax against you and plague you with toads, beetles, and bats. i'm the only subject you have in your kingdom, and you were my first king, and you pen me up in this cave and don't let me go anywhere else on the island.", "you liar, you respond better to the whip than to kindness! i took good care of you piece of filth that you are and let you stay in my own hut until you tried to rape my daughter.", "oh ho, oh ho! i wish i had! you stopped me. if you hadn't, i would have filled this island with a race of calibans."], ["you horrid slave, you can't be trained to be good, and you're capable of anything evil! i pitied you, worked hard to teach you to speak, and taught you some new thing practically every hour. when you didn't know what you were saying, and were babbling like an animal, i helped you find words to make your point understandable. but you had bad blood in you, no matter how much you learned, and good people couldn't stand to be near you. so you got what you deserved, and were locked up in this cave, which is more fitting for the likes of you than a prison would be.", "you taught me language, and all i can do with it is curse. damn you for teaching me your language!", "get out of here, you son of a bitch! bring us wood, and be quick about it. are you shrugging and making faces, you evil thing? if you neglect my orders or do them grudgingly, i'll double you up with pains and cramps, and make all your bones ache, and make you scream so loud that the wild animals will tremble when they hear you.", "no, please. i have to obey. he's got such strong magic powers that he could conquer and enslave the god, setebos, that my mother used to worship.", "go then, slave."], ["( ) , , . ,", "bow-wow.", "the watchdogs bark.", "bow-wow.", "listen, listen! i hear the tune of the strutting rooster who cries cock-a-doodle-doo.", "where's that music coming from? from the earth, or the air? it's stopped now it must be played for some local god of the island. as i sat on the shore crying over my father's shipwreck, i heard the music creep over the wild waves, calming their fury and soothing my own grief with its sweet melodies. i followed it here, or i should say it dragged me here. but now it's stopped. no, there it is again."], [", . . , . .", "( )ding-dong.", "listen, i hear them.", "ding dong, bell.", "this song's about my dead father. it couldn't be sung by mere mortals. i hear it now overhead.", "miranda raise the curtains of your eyelids and go take a peek at what you can see out there.", "what is it? a spirit? lord, it's glancing every which way! how handsome it is. it must be a spirit.", "no, girl! it eats and sleeps and has the same five senses we do. the gentleman you see now was in the shipwreck, and if he weren't a little spoiled by grief, which always ruins good looks, you could call him handsome. he's lost his comrades and is wandering around looking for them."], ["i could imagine he's divine, since i never saw anything so noble-looking on earth before.", "it's all happening according to plan, just as my soul wanted it to happen. ariel spirit, you fine spirit, i'll set you free in two days for doing such a good job here.", "miranda this must surely be the goddess that the music is being played for! please, i beg you to answer me, tell me if you live on this island, and tell me how i should behave here. my main question, which i save for the last, is oh, you marvelous creature! are you a maiden or a goddess?", "i'm not marvelous, sir, but i'm certainly a maiden.", "she speaks my language! my god, i'm the highest-ranking person who speaks this language if only we were back where it's spoken.", "what's that? the highest-ranking? what would the king of naples do if he heard you say that?", "he would just see me for what i am, a person amazed to hear you talking about naples. he does hear me, and that makes me cry. i myself am the king of naples, since i saw with my own eyes these eyes that haven't been dry since my father killed in a shipwreck.", "ah, how pitiful!"], ["yes, indeed, and all the king's men, the duke of milan and his fine son too.", "the real duke of milan and his far finer daughter could beat you in a heartbeat, if it were the right time. they've fallen in love at first sight! wonderful ariel, i'll set you free for doing such good work here. ferdinand could i have a word with you, sir? i'm afraid you've made a mistake. just a word.", "why is my father speaking to him so rudely? this is the third man i've ever seen in my life, and the first one i've felt romantic feelings for. i hope my father takes pity on me and treats him well for my sake!", "oh, if you're a virgin, and you haven't given your heart to another man, then i'll make you the queen of naples.", "hang on, sir! just a moment. they're both in love. but i need to cause a little trouble between them, or else they'll never appreciate the value of their love. ferdinand i need a word with you, sir. i order you to listen to me. you're calling yourself by a name that doesn't belong to you. you've come onto this island as a spy, to snatch it away from me i'm the rightful lord of it.", "no, i swear, that's not true!"], ["a man as handsome as that can't have anything evil in him. if the devil had such a beautiful house as his body, then good things would fight to live in it.", "ferdinand follow me. miranda don't defend him. he's a traitor. ferdinand come on, i'll chain your neck and feet together, and i'll give you sea water to drink. your food will be slugs, dry roots, and acorn shells. come on.", "no, i'll have to decline that offer at least as long as i'm stronger than you are.", "oh, dear father, don't judge him too quickly. he's a good man, and brave too.", "what's that? the daughter knows more than the father? put away your sword, traitor. you make quite a show there, but you're too scared to strike at me, since you feel too guilty. get out of that position, because i can disarm you with my magic wand and make your sword drop.", "please, father, i beg you.", "let go of me! don't tug on my clothes."], ["father, take pity on him. i'll guarantee his goodness myself.", "quiet! if you say one more word, i'll punish you, maybe even hate you. you're defending an impostor? be quiet. you think he's special, since you've only ever seen him and caliban. foolish girl, in the eyes of most people this man's a caliban, and compared to him, they're angels.", "then my love is humble. i don't feel any urge to see a more handsome man than this one.", "ferdinand come on. obey my orders. your muscles are all limp and lifeless.", "that's true, they are. my strength is all gone, as if in a dream. the death of my father, my physical weakness, the loss of all my friends, the threats of this man who's taken me prisoner all that would be easy for me to take, if only i could look through my prison windows once a day and see this girl. i don't need any more freedom than that. a prison like that would give me enough liberty.", "it's working! ferdinand come on. you've done well, ariel. ferdinand follow me. ariel listen to what you'll do for me next."], ["ferdinand don't worry, my father's kinder than his words just now make him sound. what he said didn't sound like him at all.", "ariel you'll be free as a bird. but you have to do exactly what i order.", "down to the last detail.", "ferdinand come, follow me. miranda don't defend him."], ["alonso please cheer up, sir. like all of us, you have a good reason to be happy. the fact that we're alive outweighs our losses. many people every day feel the sadness we feel now. every day some sailor's wife, a ship's crew, the merchant who hired the ship all experience the same loss we've undergone. but the miracle the fact that we were saved only happens to a few people out of millions. so remember that, and take comfort in it, to counterbalance our sadness.", "please say no more.", "antonio alonso enjoys these comforting words about as much as cold oatmeal.", "sebastian but the goodwill ambassador won't give up that easily.", "antonio look. he's like a clock winding up to strike the hour.", "alonso sir", "antonio there he goes! now we can tell what time it is.", "if we let every sad thing that happens to us get us down, then we would find ourselves"], ["what a pain.", "pain, yes indeed. we would find ourselves in pain. you thought you were being funny, but you said the truth.", "you're taking it more seriously than i meant it.", "alonso therefore, sir", "sebastian god, doesn't he ever shut up?", "gonzalo please, no more.", "well, i'm nearly finished. but just one last thing", "antonio he insists on talking.", "hey, let's bet. which one will start yammering first, gonzalo or adrian?", "the old guy.", "i pick the younger one.", "you're on. what's the prize?", "a good laugh.", "it's a deal!", "though this island may appear desolate", "sebastian ha, ha, ha!"], ["fine, you win.", "uninhabitable and almost inaccessible, as it were", "now he's going to say \"but\"", "but", "he had to say it, it was unavoidable.", "the island must be mild, and have a temperate climate.", "i knew temperance she was a fine girl.", "yes, and she was mild too.", "there's always a breath of fresh air here.", "a breath from rotten lungs, maybe.", "stinking like a swamp.", "this island contains everything beneficial to life.", "true. everything except something to live on.", "there's little or nothing of that.", "look how lush and healthy the grass is! how green!", "the ground is brown.", "with a touch of green in it.", "he doesn't miss a thing."], ["no, he just gets reality completely wrong.", "but the really unbelievable thing is and this is incredible", "as most unbelievable things are.", "that our clothes were drenched with sea water, but they came out looking brand-new.", "listen to him. if his clothes could talk, they'd call him a liar.", "or stuff what he says into their pockets.", "seriously, i think our clothes are as fresh now as they were the day we put them on in africa, when we attended the marriage of the king's daughter claribel to the king of tunis.", "it was a lovely wedding, and we're doing really well on our trip home.", "tunis has never had such a beautiful queen.", "not since the days of widow .", "widow? why the hell is he calling her \"widow dido\"?"], ["next thing you know, he'll be saying \"widower aeneas.\"", "\"widow dido,\" did you say? i'm not sure about that. dido was from carthage, not tunis.", "carthage, sir.", "carthage?", "i'm telling you, it was carthage.", "gonzalo is a miracle-worker. if he says carthage was here, then carthage must be here.", "what miracle will he work next?", "i think he'll carry this island home in his pocket and give it to his son like an apple.", "and then throw the seeds in the sea, to make more islands grow.", "yes indeed.", "absolutely, yes indeed.", "alonso sir, we were saying that our clothes seem just as fresh as they did when we attended the wedding of your daughter, who's now queen of tunis."], ["the most beautiful queen they ever had.", "i beg your pardon, except for the widow dido.", "oh, except for the widow dido? that's right, except for the widow dido.", "isn't my vest just as clean and fresh as the day i put it on? in a way, i mean.", "\"in a way\" is the right way to go.", "i mean when i wore it at your daughter's wedding.", "you keep cramming words into my ears that i don't want to hear. i wish that wedding had never happened, since i lost my son because of it, and i lost my daughter too in a way, since she's moved so far from milan that i'll never see her again. oh, dear son of mine and heir of naples and milan, what strange fish has made a meal of you?", "sir, he may still be alive. i saw him swimming strongly, almost as if he was riding the waves. he treaded water and kept his head well above the wild waters coming at him, swimming with his strong arms toward the shore, which almost seemed eager to welcome him. i have no doubt he got ashore alive."], ["no, no, he's dead.", "sir, you can thank yourself for this great loss, because you wouldn't bless europe with your daughter, but instead pimped her out to an african. at least you can be thankful that she won't be around to remind you of your loss.", "please be quiet.", "we all begged you not to go ahead with those marriage plans, and your lovely daughter struggled between disgust at marrying an african and the desire to obey you. now i'm afraid we've lost your son forever. our shipwreck has made more women widows in milan and naples than there are survivors to comfort them. and it's all your fault.", "and the greatest sorrow is mine too.", "my lord sebastian, even though what you say is true, your way of saying it is tactless and comes at the wrong time. you're rubbing salt in his wounds when you should be applying bandages.", "all right, i'll stop.", "like a good doctor.", "alonso it's bad times for all of us, sir, when you're feeling gloomy."], ["bad times?", "yes, very bad.", "if i could colonize this island, my lord", "he'd cultivate weeds on it.", "or thorn-bushes.", "and if i were king of it, you know what i'd do?", "he wouldn't get drunk much, since there's no wine here.", "in my kingdom i'd do everything differently from the way it's usually done. i wouldn't allow any commerce. there'd be no officials or administrators. there'd be no schooling or literature. there'd be no riches, no poverty, and no servants none. no contracts or inheritance laws; no division of the land into private farms, no metal-working, agriculture, or vineyards. there'd be no work. men would have nothing to do, and women also but they'd be innocent and pure. there'd be no kingship", "he wants to be king in a place with no kingship.", "yes, he's getting a bit confused.", "everything would be produced without labor, and would be shared by all. there'd be no treason, crimes, or weapons. nature would produce its harvests in abundance, to feed my innocent people."], ["there'd be no marriage?", "no. everyone would have nothing to do. they'd all be whores and slackers.", "i would rule so perfectly that my country would outshine the golden age they had in ancient times.", "long live his majesty!", "all hail gonzalo!", "alonso are you listening to me, sir?", "oh, please be quiet. you're spouting empty words.", "you're absolutely right, your highness. i talked like that to give these gentlemen here a chance to have a good laugh. they love to laugh at empty words.", "it's you we were laughing at.", "but from your perspective i don't matter, so i'm just an empty nobody for you. go ahead and laugh at my empty words some more.", "ouch, what a comeback!", "he sure did. too bad it fell flat.", "you're brave gentlemen. you'd give the moon a shove if it got stuck five weeks in its orbit."], ["that's right, and then after we fixed the moon, we'd go bird-hunting.", "gonzalo don't be angry with us, my lord.", "i'm not. i've got good judgment, and i know you've got nothing against me. will you laugh me to sleep? i'm feeling very sleepy.", "go to sleep, and listen to us laughing.", "what, everybody falls asleep so fast? i wish i could sleep too it would stop me from thinking. come to think of it, i am feeling sleepy.", "in that case you should sleep. people in grief need a good sleep. it doesn't come to them often, but when it does come they should enjoy it.", "the two of us will guard you while you sleep, my lord, and keep you safe.", "thank you. i'm terribly sleepy."], ["how strange that they all got so sleepy!", "there must be something in the air here.", "so why aren't our eyelids heavy? i'm not sleepy at all.", "me neither. i'm wide awake. they all fell asleep together, as if they'd planned it. like they'd all been struck by lightning. what might happen, sebastian, what might happen if no, it's time for me to shut up. but still, i think i can see in your face what you ought to be. opportunity's knocking for you, and in my imagination i see a crown dropping onto your head.", "are you dreaming or awake?", "don't you hear me speaking?", "i do, and it sounds like you're talking in your sleep. what did you say? it's weird for you to be dreaming with your eyes wide open standing, talking, moving, but sound asleep.", "good sebastian, you're the one who's sleeping if you let this opportunity pass you by without acting on it.", "you're snoring, but it sounds like you're talking. there's meaning in your snoring."], ["i'm not kidding when i say this, i'm not joking around like usual. you should be serious too when you listen to what i'm saying. you can become a great man if you listen to me.", "i'm hanging on every word you say.", "you need to do more than hang around you have to act. i'll show you how.", "you need to. i'm lazy by nature.", "oh, if you only knew how close to success you are, even while you make fun of what i'm telling you! the more you joke about it, the more clearly i feel how serious it is! lazy people end up at the bottom, and you deserve to be at the top.", "please, tell me more. there's something in your expression that tells me you have something serious to say, and you're having a lot of difficulty saying it.", "this is what i'm saying. gonzalo although this lord who has such a bad memory and who will be forgotten by the world when he's dead and buried almost succeeded in convincing the king that his son's alive, it's impossible that he survived. it's as far from the truth as saying this sleeping man is swimming."], ["yes, i'm sure he's dead. i've got no hope that he survived.", "but in that \"no hope\" there are great hopes for you! that \"no hope\" means you're on the way to glory so brilliant you couldn't even imagine it, no matter how ambitious you were. do you agree that ferdinand must have drowned?", "he's dead.", "so, in that case, tell me who's next in line to inherit the kingdom of naples?", "claribel, his daughter.", "the one who's now queen of tunis, living at the edge of the world, out of reach of mail service. it takes a letter longer to reach her than it takes a baby boy to grow old enough to shave. claribel who was the cause of our shipwreck, which a few of us survived she was destined to give us an opportunity that we are destined to act on.", "what in the world are you talking about? it's true that my brother's daughter is queen of tunis, and heir of naples. and it's true those two places are far apart.", "so far that every foot of distance between them seems to shout, \"it's too far for claribel to come back to naples. let her stay in tunis and give sebastian a"], ["chance to start living.\" if these sleeping men were dead instead of sleeping, they'd be no worse off than they are now. there are a lot of men who can rule naples just as well as this sleeping guy here can. there are a lot of men who babble nonsense as well as gonzalo. i could do it myself. oh, i wish you understood what i'm saying you'd see how you're missing out on a great opportunity for yourself! do you even get what i'm saying?", "i think i do.", "and does this prospect of good fortune make you happy?", "i remember you took the throne from your brother prospero.", "yes i did, and look how good i look in my new role much better than before. my brother's servants used to be my equals. now they work for me.", "but what about your guilty conscience?", "yes. what guilty conscience? i don't feel anything. if my feet were cold, i'd put my slippers on, but i don't feel any pangs of guilt. if there were twenty guilty consciences between me and the dukedom, they'd melt away to nothing before they caused me any trouble. here's your brother sleeping, worth no more than the dirt he's lying on. if he were as dead as he appears to be now and i could quickly make him dead with this sword of mine he wouldn't stand in our way. as"], ["for the other men, we can make them believe anything we choose. they'll set their watches to whatever time we say.", "you'll be my role model. just as you got milan, i'll get naples. take out your sword. with one cut you can be through paying money to naples. and as king i'll love you forever.", "you take out your sword too. when i raise my hand, you do the same, and bring it down on gonzalo's head.", "oh, but there's one more thing to tell you. antonio", "gonzalo with his magic powers my master can see the dangers that you are in, my friend. so he sent me to make sure these men survive and to guarantee his plans succeed. gonzalo"], ["let's act quickly.", "god help the king! save him!", "hey, what's this, what's going on? wake up!", "why are your swords out? why do you look like that?", "what's this all about?", "while we were here guarding you as you slept, we heard a loud roar that sounded like bulls, or lions. didn't you hear it? we heard it very clearly.", "i didn't hear anything.", "oh, it was a monstrous roar, to make the earth tremble! i'm sure there was a herd of lions nearby.", "did you hear this, gonzalo?", "it's true i heard a humming sound, a strange one, which woke me up. i shook you and shouted at you, sir. when i opened my eyes, i saw their swords out. there was a noise, that's certainly true. we should either be on guard here constantly or move to a different camp. let's draw our own swords too."], ["lead us away from this area. we can search for my poor son while we're at it.", "i hope those lions stay far away from him. i'm sure he's somewhere on the island.", "get us out of here.", "my lord prospero will know what i've done. so go ahead, king, and look for your son."], ["i hope all the diseases that breed in swamps and marshes infect prospero, inch by inch, until he's nothing but a walking disease! his spirits are listening to me, but i can't help cursing him anyway. they won't pinch me, frighten me, push me in the mud, or mislead me unless he tells them to. but he sends them to punish me for every little thing. sometimes his spirits take the form of apes, grimacing and chattering at me and then biting me; sometimes they come like porcupines, my feet as i walk. sometimes snakes wrap around me, hissing at me with their forked tongues till i go crazy.", "hey, look over there! here comes one of his spirits to torture me for taking so long to bring the wood back. i'll lie down and hide. maybe he won't see me.", "there are no bushes or shrubs to protect me from the weather here. and there's another storm brewing i can hear it in the way the wind whistles. that huge black cloud over there looks like a filthy liquor jug that's about to pour out its contents. it won't be able to help pouring rain down by the bucket-full. caliban"], ["what do we have here, a man or a fish? whew, he stinks like a fish an old salted fish, not a fresh-caught one. a strange fish. if i were in england now, like i was once, and i had even a painted picture of this fish, every fool there would give me a piece of silver to look at it. in england this strange monster would be just like a man. any strange beast there can be considered a man. the men there won't give a penny to a lame beggar, but they'll pay ten cents to look at a freak show exhibit. this guy has legs like a man but fins for arms! and he's still warm, by god. i guess this is not a fish, but a native who got struck by lightning just now.", "oh, here comes the storm again. the best thing to do is crawl under his cloak. there's no other shelter around here. in emergencies you meet the strangest folks. i'll just stay here till the storm passes. caliban", "this is a rotten song to sing at a man's funeral. at least i've got some booze to comfort me."], [".", "don't hurt me. oh!", "what's going on? do we have devils on the island? are you playing tricks on me by showing me savages and uncivilized men from the indies, ha? i didn't survive a shipwreck so i could be scared of your four legs now. i'll never run away from any ordinary man who walks on four legs like the rest of us.", "the spirit is torturing me. oh!", "this is some monster of the island, with four legs, who seems to me to have some kind of ache. how the hell does he know our language? i'll help out, if only because he speaks the same language as me. if i can cure him from his fever and tame him, and get him back to naples, he'd make a great present for any emperor.", "don't hurt me, please. i promise i'll carry the wood faster.", "he's having a fit and talking nonsense. i'll give him some liquor. if he's never drunk it before, it'll help soothe his fever. if i can tame him, i'll charge as much as i can get for him. he'll bring a lot of money to the person who owns him, that's for sure."], ["you haven't hurt me much yet, but you will soon, i can tell by your trembling. prospero sent you here.", "caliban come on, open your mouth. this'll help you talk. open up. this'll stop you from trembling i can tell you that for sure. caliban you don't even know who your friends are. open up that mouth again.", "i almost recognize that voice. it's but he's drowned, and these guys are devils. oh, god help me!", "four legs and two voices a very special monster. one voice speaks well and talks about his friend. the other voice is harsh and abusive. i can charge even more for this. if it takes all the wine in my bottle, i'll cure him. come on. caliban that's good! now i'll pour some in your other mouth.", "stephano!", "is your other mouth calling my name? mercy, mercy! this isn't a monster, it's a devil. i'll leave him alone. i have no interest in getting mixed up with the devil.", "stephano! if you're stephano, touch me and speak to me. i'm trinculo don't be scared your good friend trinculo.", "if you're trinculo, then come out. i'll pull on these smaller legs. if any legs here are trinculo's, these are. trinculo well,"], ["what do you know, you trinculo! how did you end up as this monster's dung? does he crap trinculos?", "i thought he was dead, struck by lightning. but aren't you drowned, stephano? i hope you're not drowned. has the storm passed? i hid under this monster's cloak to get out of the storm. are you really alive, stephano? oh, stephano, two men from naples survived! trinculo stephano", "please stop turning me around. my stomach's a little upset.", "these are beautiful creatures, if they're not spirits. he's a good god, who brings liquor from the heavens. i will worship him.", "trinculo how did you survive? how did you get here? tell me the truth, swear on this bottle of wine. i made it out of tree bark after i washed ashore. i myself floated here on a barrel of wine that the sailors tossed overboard.", "stephano i'll swear by that wine bottle to be your true subject. you must be a god, since your liquor is out of this world.", "trinculo here. swear, and tell me how you survived.", "i swam ashore like a duck. i can swim like a duck, i swear.", "here, and swear. you may swim like a duck, but you look more like a goose."], ["oh stephano, do you have any more of that wine?", "i've got the whole barrel, man. i live in a cave by the seaside, where i keep the barrel hidden. hey, monster, how's your fever?", "you come from heaven, don't you?", "no, from the moon, i'm telling you. i used to be the man in the moon a long time ago.", "oh, i've seen you in the moon, and i worship you. my mistress showed me you in the moon and your dog and your bush.", "come on, swear to it. kiss the bible and swear it. i'm going to fill the bottle up again soon.", "when you get a good look at him, you see he's not much of a monster. i can't believe i was scared of him! a pretty pathetic monster. the man in the moon! what a poor, gullible monster. that was a nice big gulp, monster!", "stephano i'll show you every inch of the island, and i'll kiss your feet. i beg you, please be my god.", "what a lying, drunken monster. when his god falls asleep, the monster will snatch his wine bottle."], ["stephano i'll kiss your feet. i'll vow to be your faithful subject.", "come on, then. get down and swear it.", "i'm going to laugh myself to death over this silly monster. a rotten, foolish monster. i could find it in my heart to beat him", "come on, kiss my feet.", "except the poor monster's drunk. an awful monster!", "i'll show you where to get fresh water. i'll pick berries for you. i'll fish for you and get you plenty of firewood. the tyrant i'm serving now can go to hell! i won't get any more wood for him. i'm serving you now, you wonderful man.", "what a silly monster, to think a poor drunk is wonderful.", "stephano i beg you, let me show where you can find crabs to eat. i'll use my long fingernails to dig edible roots for you, find you a bird's nest, and teach you how to catch a nimble monkey. i'll take you to clusters of hazelnuts, and sometimes i'll catch birds for you on the rocks. will you come with me?", "show us the way without further delay. trinculo, since the king and all our comrades are drowned, we're the heirs of this place. here, carry my wine bottle. trinculo, my buddy, we'll get that bottle refilled soon enough."], [".", "a loud-mouthed, drunken monster.", ", , . .", "good monster! show us the way."], ["some games are painful, but their discomfort makes them more fun. some kinds of lowly activities are done for noble reasons. and you can do poor things that lead to rich results. this hard work would be boring and nasty to me, but i'm working for a mistress who makes me enjoy my labor. oh, she's ten times nicer than her father is mean, and he's the height of crabbiness. i have thousands of logs to take away and pile up, on strict orders from him. my sweet darling cries when she sees me work and tells me that such a wonderful man never performed such lowly tasks before. these sweet thoughts relieve me and refresh me, especially when i'm slaving away busily.", "now, please, i beg you, don't work so hard. i wish the lightning had burned up all those logs that you've been ordered to stack! please put that log down and rest a while. when this wood burns, it'll weep for making you tired. my father's studying hard, so he won't see you. so please rest. we're safe from my father for at least three hours."], ["oh, my dear mistress, i won't be able to finish this work until sunset at the earliest.", "if you sit down, i'll carry your logs a while. please give me that. i'll take it over to the pile.", "no, my darling, i'd rather strain all my muscles and break my back than let you do work like this while i lounge around nearby.", "i'd be as right for the job as you are, and i'd do it more easily, since i'd have good will on my side.", "you poor weak thing, you're in love! i can see it clearly now.", "you look tired.", "no, noble mistress, i'm as fresh as morning when you're near me, even at night. i beg you to tell me your name so i can use it in my prayers.", "miranda. oh father, i've disobeyed you by telling him that!", "miranda the very name means \"admired!\" you are indeed admired, more than anything else in the world! i've looked at many ladies with pleasure, and been"], ["seduced by the sweet nothings they said to me. i've liked several women for their good qualities, but there was something wrong with each one that blotted her excellent qualities and cancelled them out. but with you it's different. you're perfect, without a rival in the world, made up of the best qualities of every creature.", "i've never known any woman or seen a woman's face except my own in the mirror. and i've never met any men besides you and my father. i have no idea what people look like in other places, but i swear by my modesty, which i value above everything else, that i'd never want any companion in the world but you. i can't even imagine one. but listen to me chattering like crazy, and father always told me not to.", "i'm a prince by birth, miranda maybe even a king now; though i wish i weren't and normally i wouldn't put up with carrying these logs any more than i'd let flies breed in my mouth. but i'll tell you something from my soul. the second i saw you, my heart rushed to serve you and be your slave, so here i am now, a patient log-man.", "do you love me?", "oh heaven, oh earth, witness what i'm about to say, and reward me if i tell the truth! if i'm lying, then"], ["destroy all my prospects in life! more than anything else in the world, i love you, value you, and honor you.", "look at me crying what a fool i am to cry at what makes me happy.", "what a pleasant meeting between two people truly in love! may heaven bless the feelings growing between them!", "why are you crying?", "i'm crying at how unworthy i am to give you what i want to give you and to take what i'm dying to have. but it's a waste of time to say so. the more i try to hide what i'm feeling, the bigger it gets. oh, stop being so bashful and tricky, miranda, just be straightforward and innocent! i'll be your wife if you'll have me. otherwise, i'll die a virgin, devoted to you. you can refuse to make me your spouse, but i'll be your servant whether you want me to or not.", "you'll be my wife, dearest, and i'll serve you forever.", "will you be my husband, then?", "yes, with a heart more eager to bear a husband's responsibilities than a slave ever wanted freedom. take my hand, darling.", "here's my hand, and my heart. and now goodbye. i'll see you again in half an hour."], ["a million goodbyes to you.", "i can't be as happy as they are at this moment, but nothing could make me any happier. now it's time to get back to my studying, since i have a lot of serious business to take care of before dinner."], ["don't tell me that. when the barrel's empty, we'll drink water. not one drop sooner. therefore, drink up. servant-monster, drink a toast to me.", "\"servant monster\"? what a crazy island this is. they say there are only five people on it. we're three of them. if the other two are as loopy as we are, our country's in bad shape.", "drink when i order you, servant-monster. your eyes look like they've sunk into your head.", "where else should his eyes be, if not in his head? he'd be quite a monster if his eyes were in his tail.", "my man monster is so drunk he can't talk. as for me, no liquid can harm me, neither booze nor the whole sea itself. before i could get to shore, i swam thirty-five in it and still survived. monster, you'll be my lieutenant, or my flag-bearer.", "lieutenant is better. he's not standing straight enough to hold a flag.", "we're not going to run in our army, monsieur monster.", "or walk either. you'll just lie there like sleeping dogs and say nothing."], ["monster sweetie, be a good monster and just speak once.", "how is your highness? let me lick your shoe. trinculo i'll never serve that guy there. he's not courageous like you.", "caliban you're a liar, you ignorant monster. i'm courageous. i could shake up a police officer right now. you drunken fish, you, how could you call me a coward after all the booze i've drunk today? do you tell such monstrous lies because you're half fish and half monster?", "stephano look how he's making fun of me! will you let him talk to me like, my lord?", "\"lord,\" he calls you? what an idiot that monster is!", "stephano there he goes again! please, bite him to death, i'm begging you.", "trinculo, speak politely. if you mutiny against me, i'll hang you from the next tree. this poor monster is my subject, and i will not allow him to be insulted.", "thank you, my noble lord. now would you please listen once again to the request i made to you earlier?", "indeed, i will. kneel and tell me again. i'll stand, and so will trinculo."], ["as i told you before, i'm enslaved to a tyrant, a magician who tricked me with magic spells and took my island from me.", "you lie.", "trinculo you're the liar, you big fat monkey. i wish my courageous master would kill you. i'm not lying.", "trinculo, if you interrupt him any more, i swear i'll knock some teeth out of your head.", "i didn't say anything.", "okay, just stay quiet. go on.", "i was telling you he used witchcraft to take this island. he stole it from me. if your highness is willing, take revenge on him for that because i know you're brave enough, i don't dare to", "that's for sure.", "you'll be lord of the island then, and i'll be your servant.", "and how would we go about doing that? can you bring me to him?", "yes, yes, my lord. i'll take you to where he sleeps, and you can pound a nail into his head.", "you lie. you can't do that."], ["what an idiot this guy is! you're a rotten piece of work! i beg your highness, beat him up and take his wine bottle from him. when he loses that, he'll be drinking salt water, since i'll never tell him where the freshwater springs are.", "trinculo, watch out. if you interrupt this monster with one more word, i'll beat you like a piece of salted fish.", "what did i do? i didn't do anything. i need to get away from you.", "didn't you call him a liar?", "you lie.", "trinculo oh, i did? take that, then. trinculo if you want more beatings like that, just accuse me of lying again.", "i didn't accuse you of lying. are you out of your mind and deaf too? damn your wine! this is what happens when you drink too much. your monster can go to hell, and you can too!", "ha, ha, ha!", "now go ahead and tell me the rest of your story. please go stand farther away.", "beat him up. after a little while, i'll beat him too.", "stand farther away. come on, continue your story."], ["just as i told you, he usually sleeps in the afternoon. at that time you can smash in his skull after seizing his books; or you can bash his skull with a log; or you can stab him in the belly; or cut his windpipe. just remember to grab his books first, since without them he's just a poor fool like me, and can't command a single spirit. all the spirits hate him as much as i do. be sure to burn his magic books. he has some wonderful home furnishings that's what he calls them that he'll use to decorate his house when he gets one. the most important thing for you to think about is how beautiful his daughter is. he says she has no equal. i never saw a woman except her and sycorax, my mother. but miranda is so much more beautiful, you can't even compare the two.", "is she really that wonderful?", "yes, my lord. she'll look good in your bed, and she'll produce some fine children too.", "monster, i'll kill this man. his daughter and i will be king and queen god protect us! and you and trinculo will be our governors. do you like that idea, trinculo?", "excellent.", "give me your hand. i'm sorry i hit you. but try to control your speech.", "in a half an hour he'll be asleep. will you kill him then?"], ["yes, i swear.", "i'll tell my master this.", "you make me so happy. i'm full of joy. let's be light-hearted. will you sing the tune you taught me just a little while ago?", "i'll do anything you ask, monster, anything reasonable. come on, trinculo, let's sing. . .", "that's not the tune i had in mind.", "what's this song?", "that's the melody, played by nobody.", "if you're a man, then let us see what you look like. if you're a devil, then go to hell.", "oh, forgive all my sins!", "dead men have to pay their debts. i challenge you! god help us.", "are you scared?"], ["no, monster, not me.", "don't be scared. this island is full of noises, strange sounds and sweet melodies that make you feel good and don't hurt anyone. sometimes i hear a thousand twanging instruments hum at my ears, and sometimes voices that send me back to sleep even if i had just woken up and then i dreamed of clouds opening up and dropping such riches on me that when i woke up, i cried because i wanted to dream again.", "this'll be a wonderful kingdom to live in, where they play music for free.", "as soon as you kill prospero.", "that'll happen soon enough. i remember the plan.", "the sound is going away. but let's follow it, and then do our dirty work afterward.", "lead us, monster; we'll follow. i wish i could see this invisible drummer. he really plays well.", "i'm right behind you, stephano. are you coming monster?"], ["i swear, i can't go any further, sir. my old bones are tired. we're wandering in a maze. if you don't mind, i need to rest a bit.", "i can't blame you, old lord. i'm so tired myself that it's bringing me down. sit down and rest. i'm losing hope. the one we're looking for is dead. we're searching on land, but he's lost in the sea. we have to give up and let him go.", "sebastian i'm glad he's so depressed. don't back out of our plan just because it didn't work the first time.", "antonio the next chance we get, we'll do the deed.", "sebastian let's do it tonight. the men are so tired from traveling that they can't be as careful as they are when they're fresh."], ["antonio yes, tonight. no more talking about this now.", "what's that music? my friends, listen.", "what marvelous music!", "heaven help us! what were those things?", "a puppet show in real life. now i'll believe that unicorns exist, and that there's a tree in arabia where the phoenix lives.", "me too. and anything else that's hard to believe, just ask me and i'll swear it's true. travelers have never told lies, no matter what the fools at home accuse them of.", "if i told them about this back in naples, would they believe me? i'd tell them that i saw natives like these since they must be natives who are graceful and well-mannered even if they're monstrous to look at, kinder than most human beings you might find kinder than almost any human.", "my good lord, you're absolutely right, since some of you are worse than devils."], ["i can't stop being amazed by these shapes, sounds, and gestures, which express, even without saying anything, a wonderful kind of silent language.", "time to go.", "they vanished strangely.", "it's all right, since they left their food behind, and we're hungry. would you like to taste the banquet?", "not me.", "i assure you, sir, there's nothing to be afraid of. when we were boys, who'd believe that there were mountain people with rolls of skin around their necks, with their throats hanging down? or that there were men with heads in their chests? nowadays travelers commonly report that these things exist.", "i'll start eating, even if this is my last supper. it's all right, since the best part of my life was over anyway. brother, duke, please have some food."], ["alonso, antonio, sebastian the three of you are sinners, and destiny made the sea belch you up onto this island where no men live, since none of you deserve to live. i've driven you crazy, and many mad people are driven to kill themselves in desperation. listen, you fools, my fellow and i carry out fate's orders. your swords are useless against us you'd be more successful swinging them at the empty air, or stabbing at water, than trying to cut off even one of my feathers. my two companions are just as invulnerable as i am. even if you had the power to hurt us, you'd find your swords far too heavy to lift. but remember and it's my job to remind you of this that in milan the three of you stole prospero's throne and threw him and his innocent child into the sea, which has now taken revenge on you. to punish you for this horrible crime, the higher powers delaying their punishment, not forgetting about it have stirred up the seas and all the creatures of earth against you. they've taken your only son from you, alonso, and they've ordered me to destroy you slowly, in a way worse than sudden death could ever be. i'll stay with you every step of your way. the only way to protect yourselves from the angry higher powers which are ready to fall upon your head on this empty island is for you to be sincerely sorry in your hearts for what you've done, and to live innocent lives from this time forward."], ["you've played the role of harpy very well, my ariel. you were fierce but graceful. you said everything i told you to say. in the same lifelike way, and with the same attention to detail, my lower-ranking servants have done what they were supposed to do. my magic powers are all in full swing, and my enemies are confused and running around in circles. they're under my control, and i'm keeping them in their crazy fits while i go visit ferdinand, whom they think has drowned, and the young woman he and i both love.", "alonso for the love of god, sir, why are you standing here staring into space like this?", "oh, it's horrible, horrible. i thought the clouds were talking to me, the winds were singing to me, and the thunder, like an awful organ pipe, roared prospero's name. it sang about my crimes. because of my crimes my son is dead on the ocean floor. i'll go join him there, going down deeper than any anchor ever sank, and lie with him dead in the mud."], ["i'll fight every one of these devils if i have to, one at a time.", "i'll back you up.", "all three of them are crazy with despair. their guilt is finally starting to gnaw at them, like a slow-acting poison. those of you who are young and active, i beg you to follow them and keep them from doing the crazy things their guilt might push them to do.", "follow them, please."], ["ferdinand if i've punished you too harshly, i'm ready to make it up to you now, since i've given you a third of my life everything i live for my daughter miranda. i put her in your hands. all the trouble i put you through was to test your love for her, and you've passed the test remarkably well. as heaven is my witness, i give you this valuable gift. oh ferdinand, don't smile at me for bragging about miranda, for you'll see soon enough that she outshines any praise of her.", "i'd believe it even if told me differently.", "then take my daughter, both as my gift to you and as something you have earned. but if you have sex with her before the marriage ceremony takes place, the heavens will not bless your relationship, but will overwhelm you with hate, contempt, and discord, and will poison your marriage bed so that you both grow to loathe it. so be careful, and make sure you respect the holy institution of marriage."], ["i want peace, good kids, and a long life. to protect the love i cherish, i won't be tempted by any opportunity to forget my honor and give in to lust. i refuse to give up the joys of my wedding day, when i'll be so eager for my first night of love that i'll wonder whether evening will ever come.", "you've said it well. so have a seat and talk to her. she's yours. come, ariel! my trusty servant, ariel!", "what does my powerful master wish for? i'm here.", "you and your fellow spirits did your last assignment well, and now i need your help again. go bring them all here; i give you power over them. make them act quickly. i have to give this young couple here a small display of my magic powers. i've promised them i would, and they're expecting it.", "right now?", "yes, right away.", "before you can say \"come\" and \"go,\" and breathe twice, and shout \"so, so!\" each one of your servants will rush here,"], ["tripping over his own toes, making funny faces. do you love me, master? no?", "i love you dearly, ariel. don't come near till you hear me call you.", "all right, i understand.", "ferdinand make sure you behave honorably. don't go too far with her. if you let yourself get stirred up, you'll forget your promise of good behavior. calm yourself down or you'll forget your vow.", "i assure you, sir, the tender love i feel in my heart is stronger than the sexual passions stirring down below.", "good. now come, ariel! better to have an extra servant on hand than be understaffed. appear before me now quickly", "no talking. just watch! be quiet.", "i am the rainbow-bearing messenger sent by my mistress juno the queen of the sky. i have come to announce that juno has asked you, ceres, goddess of the fields and the earth, to leave your rich farms of wheat, rye, barley, oats, and peas, the hills where the"], ["sheep nibble, the furrows that april covers with flowers for nymphs to make crowns with. you must leave the groves where the disappointed bachelor lurks, rejected by his love, and the well-pruned vineyards, and the rocky seashore.", "you must leave these places and hurry here to this grassy spot, to entertain juno.", "greetings to you, rainbow messenger, who never disobeys juno, wife of jupiter; with your golden wings you sprinkle dewdrops and refreshing showers on my flowers, and arch your colored bow over my wooded fields and grassy meadows, like a beautiful scarf to decorate my earth. why has your queen, juno, called me here to this grassy spot?", "to celebrate a marriage of true love, and give a gift to the lovers.", "tell me, rainbow, do you know if either venus, the goddess of love, or her son, cupid, is accompanying queen juno? ever since venus and her blind son plotted a way for the god of the underworld to steal my daughter away for half the year, i swore i'd never speak to them again."], ["don't be afraid of her company. i met venus as she was with her son on her way to her home on paphos, in a carriage pulled by doves. they were planning to pull a mischievous trick on ferdinand and miranda, who have sworn not to sleep together till their wedding day. but their trick failed. venus went home again, and her little son broke all his arrows, swearing he'll never shoot them again, but play with birds like other little boys.", "great queen juno is coming. i know her by her walk.", "how is my generous sister? come help me bless this couple, so they will be prosperous and have many children.", ", ."], [", , , , , ,", "this is a majestic and harmonious vision. are these spirits we see before us?", "yes, they're spirits that i've called out of their prisons to perform my whims.", "let me live here forever. such a wonderful father-in-law and wife make this place a paradise.", "now be quiet. juno and ceres are whispering about something serious. there's something else to be done. be silent, or else my magic spell will be broken.", "you nymphs who live in the wandering brooks, with seaweed crowns and innocent looks, step out of the water and come join us here on this grassy field. juno"], ["orders you. come, sweet nymphs, and help us celebrate the wedding of two true lovers. don't be late.", "now, you tanned fieldworkers who are so tired of august's labors, get out of the dirt and come rejoice with us here. put your straw hats on, have some fun, and dance with these young nymphs.", "i almost forgot about caliban's horrible conspiracy to kill me. the moment they planned to act is almost here. good job. leave now, no more!", "miranda this is strange. something has really upset your father.", "i've never seen him like this. he's never been as angry and upset as he is now.", "ferdinand you look like something's bothering you. cheer up. our music-and-dance spectacle is over. these actors were all spirits, as i told you, and they've all melted into thin air. and just like the whole empty"], ["and ungrounded vision you've seen, with its towers topped with clouds, its gorgeous palaces, solemn temples, the world itself and everyone living in it which will dissolve just as this illusory pageant has dissolved, leaving not even a wisp of cloud behind. we are all made of dreams, and our life stretches from sleep before birth to sleep after death. sir, i'm upset. please put up with my weakness. my old brain is troubled. don't be disturbed by my illness. if you like, you can rest a while in my room. i'll go for a short walk to calm down my feverish mind.", "we hope you feel better and find some peace.", "come, ariel i summon you with a thought. thank you, ariel. come.", "i obey all your thoughts. what do you wish?", "spirit, we have to get ready to meet with caliban.", "yes, my master. when i was putting on the ceres show, i thought of reminding you about caliban, but i was afraid of upsetting you.", "tell me again, where did you leave those lowlifes?"], ["i told you, sir, they were totally drunk, so puffed up with courage that they were getting angry at the air for blowing in their faces, and beating the ground for touching their feet yet even when drunk, they kept their plan firmly in mind. then i beat my drum, at which point they pricked up their ears and opened their eyes, looking around for the source of my music. i enchanted them so thoroughly that they followed me through thorn bushes and prickly shrubs that tore up their shins. in the end i left them standing in the smelly pond behind your room, with the stinking water covering them up to their chins.", "good job, my little one. stay invisible. bring the fancy clothes out of my house, to use as bait to catch these thieves.", "i'm going, i'm going.", "he's a devil, a born devil, who can never be trained. all my attempts to help him, undertaken with the best intentions, have been wasted. as his body grows uglier with age, his mind rots away as well. i'll torment them all till they roar with pain.", "here, hang them on this clothesline."], ["please walk softly, so not even a mole hears us approach. we're near his room now.", "hey monster, the spirit you've been talking about, the one you call harmless, has been playing tricks on us.", "monster, i smell like horse piss, which is making my nose pretty upset.", "mine too. are you listening, monster? if i decide to get angry at you, just watch out", "you'd be done for then, monster.", "my good lord, i still need you to like me. be patient, because the prize i'm leading you to will make you forget how smelly you are now. so be quiet. it's as silent as a graveyard here.", "all right, but i can't get over how we lost our wine bottles in the pond", "yes, monster, it's worse than the disgrace of getting drenched and smelly. we lost more than our honor when we lost our wine.", "that upsets me much more than getting wet. and you called the fairy creature harmless, monster.", "i'll get my bottle back if it's the last thing i do."], ["please, my king, be quiet. look here, this is the entrance to his room. be silent and go in. do the deed that will make this island yours forever, and will make me, caliban, your worshipful foot-licker.", "give me your hand. i'm starting to feel murderous urges.", "oh, king stephano! worthy stephano, look at the fabulous wardrobe waiting for you here!", "leave it alone, you fool. it's worthless.", "oh, monster, we know secondhand clothes when we see them. oh, king stephano!", "take off that gown, trinculo. i swear that gown's for me.", "you can have it then, your highness.", "to hell with this idiot! why are you going crazy over these trashy clothes? leave them alone, and do the murder first. if he wakes up before we kill him, he'll never stop punishing us.", "shut up, monster. madame tree, is this jacket for me? thank you kindly. the tree's lost its jacket. now the jacket might lose its fur trim and become a bald jacket."], ["go ahead, take it. we're stealing things the right way here.", "thank you for that joke. here, i'll give you some clothes to show my gratitude. as king of this country i like to reward wit when i hear it. \"stealing things the right way\" is a great line. here's another jacket to say thanks.", "come here, monster, put some glue on your fingers, and carry away the rest of these clothes for us.", "i won't have any of this. we're wasting our time. we'll miss our chance and be turned into geese or apes with low foreheads.", "monster, use your fingers. help us carry these clothes to where my barrel of wine is hidden, or i'll kick you out of my kingdom. go on, take them.", "take these too.", "yes, and these.", "hey, mountain, hey!", "silver. there they go, silver!"], ["fury, fury! get over there, tyrant, there. listen, listen!", "ariel, go order my goblin servants to make these fellows' bones ache, give them muscle cramps all over, and give them more bruises than leopards have spots.", "listen they're howling.", "hunt them down. now all my enemies are at my mercy. soon all my work will be done, and you'll be free. just obey me a little bit longer."], ["my plans are almost at their climax. my spells are working well, my spirits are obeying me, and everything is right on schedule. what time is it?", "it's after six o'clock, my lord, when you said our work would be finished.", "that's what i said when i first conjured the tempest. tell me, spirit, how's the king and his entourage?", "all cooped up together, just as you ordered, all imprisoned in the grove of linden trees that protects your room from bad weather. they can't move till you release them. the king, his brother, and your brother are all waiting there in a crazed state of mind, and the rest are grieving over them, sad and astonished. \"good old lord gonzalo,\" as you call him, is saddest of all, with tears running down his beard. your magic spell has such an effect on them that if you saw them now, you'd feel sorry for them.", "do you think so, spirit?", "i'd feel sorry for them, if i were human."], ["i will too. you're made of air, so if even you feel sorry for them, imagine the pity that i'll feel, being one of their own human race. i suffer pain just as much as they do, so i'll sympathize far more than you. though i'm indignant about their evil deeds, i'll go with my nobler instincts, which tell me to feel some compassion for them. it's better to act virtuously rather than vengefully. now that they're sorry, i don't want anything more. go release them, ariel. i'll break my spells and bring them back to their senses, and they'll feel like themselves again.", "i'll go get them, sir.", "i've darkened the noontime sun with the aid of you elves who live in the hills and brooks and groves, and you who chase the sea on the beach without leaving footprints in the sand, and run away when the waves come back; and you who make toadstools while the moon shines; who make mushrooms as a hobby after the evening bell has rung. with your help i've called up the angry winds, and set the green sea and blue sky at war with each other. i've given lightning to the thunderclouds, and burned up jupiter's beloved oak."], ["with his own lightning bolts; i've shaken up the sturdy cliffs and uprooted pines and cedars; i've opened up graves and awakened the corpses sleeping in them, letting them out with my powerful magic. but i surrender all this magic now, when i've summoned some heavenly music to cast a spell, as i'm doing now, i'll break my staff and bury it far underground, and throw my book of magic spells deeper into the sea than any anchor ever sank.", "let this solemn melody comfort your fevered minds, which are now useless, seething inside your skulls. all of you stand there in my spell. gonzalo good gonzalo, you honorable man, my eyes weep for you, since i feel what you must feel now. the spell is breaking gradually, and just as dawn creeps in and melts away the darkness, they will slowly return to their senses. gonzalo oh, my dear gonzalo, you're my savior and loyal to your lord, i'll reward you fully, not just with praise but with actions too."], ["alonso you, alonso, manipulated me and my daughter cruelly, and your brother helped you. sebastian you're paying the price for it now, sebastian. antonio my brother, you were so greedy for power that you forgot natural compassion and our bond as brothers, and were ready to kill your king i forgive you, though you're a monster. look at them, they're starting to understand. soon their confused minds will clear up. but at this point not a single one of them recognizes me. ariel ariel, get me my hat and sword from my room. i'll take off the clothes i'm wearing now, and put on the ones i used to wear in milan. soon, spirit, you'll be free.", "prospero . . . , . .", "why, that's my dainty ariel singing now. i'll miss you, ariel, but you'll be free. yes, you will, yes. go to the king's ship in your invisible state. there you'll find the sailors asleep below deck. find the master and"], ["boatswain, who will be awake, and bring them here right away, please.", "i'll go so fast i'll burn up the air, and come back in two heartbeats.", "this place is full of trouble, torments, and amazements. please come, heavenly powers, and guide us out of this godforsaken country!", "alonso your highness, you see before you the duke of milan, prospero, who's been wronged. i'll embrace you now so you will know it's really me, a living prince, talking to you. i heartily welcome you and your entourage here. alonso", "whether you're really him or whether this is some magic trick like i was recently subjected to, i don't know. your heart beats like you were real, and ever since i saw you, i feel my mind becoming sane again, released from its earlier insanity. there must be a strange explanation for this if it's true. i surrender your dukedom and beg you to forgive me all my crimes. but how is it possible that prospero's alive and well and living on this island?", "gonzalo first, my noble old friend, let me embrace you, who are more honorable than i can say."], ["i won't bet on whether or not any of this is real.", "you're still experiencing some of the little quirks of this island, which makes so many things seem uncertain. welcome, my friends. sebastian antonio but you two lords, if i felt like it, i could turn you in as the traitors you are. but as for now, i won't say a word.", "it's the devil speaking through him.", "no. antonio as for you, you evil man that i can't even call brother, i forgive you for even your worst sin, all your sins. i demand my dukedom back from you, which i know you have to give me.", "if you're prospero, give us the details of how you were saved, how you met us here, when we were just shipwrecked here three hours ago, when i lost how painful the memory is! my dear son ferdinand", "i'm sorry about that, sir.", "no one can undo this loss of mine, and trying to endure it patiently doesn't help."], ["i don't think you've tried to endure it. being patient has helped me a lot, for i have suffered a loss similar to yours.", "you suffered a loss like mine?", "yes, just as great and just as recent. and i have much less to comfort me than you do, since i've lost my daughter.", "a daughter? oh god, i wish the two of them were alive and living in naples, as king and queen! i'd give up my life and take my son's place in the mud on the ocean floor if i could see them alive in naples. when did you lose your daughter?", "in this recent storm. these lords seem so astonished that they've lost their use of reason and can hardly believe what they see with their own eyes. but whatever the reason for your losing your senses, you can know for sure that i'm prospero, that same duke who was kicked out of milan and landed on this same island where you landed, and became the lord of it. no more of this story now, for it takes days to tell, not just a chat over breakfast or during this first meeting of ours."], ["alonso welcome, sir. this room's my royal court. i have hardly any servants and no subjects outside this room. please, have a look. since you've given my dukedom back to me, i'll give you something equally nice, or at least i'll give you an amazement to satisfy you as much as my dukedom satisfies me.", "ferdinand my sweet lord, you're cheating.", "no, my dearest love, i wouldn't cheat you for the whole world.", "maybe not the whole world, but you'd cheat for twenty kingdoms. but even then i'd still lie and say you were playing by the rules.", "if this dream vision is typical of what this island conjures up, then i'll lose my son twice.", "a wonderful miracle!", "alonso the seas may threaten us, but they show mercy sometimes too. i cursed them for no reason."], ["receive all the blessings of a happy father. get up and tell me how you came here.", "how amazing! how many wonderful creatures there are here! mankind is so beautiful! oh, what a wonderful new world, that has such people in it!", "it's new to you.", "ferdinand who is this girl you were playing chess with? you can't have known her for more than three hours. is she the goddess that separated us and then brought us back together?", "no, sir, she's human. but by the grace of god, she's mine. i chose her for my wife when i thought i had no father to ask advice of. she's the daughter of this famous duke of milan i heard so much about but never saw before. he's given me a second life, and marrying her makes him a second father to me.", "and i'm her father as well. but oh, how odd it is to have to ask for my child's forgiveness!", "stop right there, sir. let's not get gloomy in our reminiscing, since there's no reason for sadness anymore."], ["i've been crying to myself just now, or i would've said the same thing. dear gods, bless this couple, since you're the ones who have shown us the path that led us here.", "amen to that, gonzalo.", "was the duke of milan kicked out of milan so his children could become kings of naples? oh, this is cause for an extraordinary joy that should be engraved in gold on pillars to last forever. on one and the same trip claribel found a husband in tunis, and ferdinand, her brother, found a wife where he was shipwrecked; prospero found his dukedom on a poor island; and all of us found ourselves when we lost control of ourselves.", "ferdinand miranda give me your hands. may anyone who doesn't wish you joy feel grief and sorrow.", "so be it. amen.", "oh, look, sir, look, sir! more of us are here. i remember i predicted that this guy could never drown, as long as there are gallows around on the land. boatswain hey, you curser, who defiled our ship with your foul language, don't you have any gutter talk for us on shore? what's going on?"], ["the best news of all is that we've located our king and our men. the next bit of good news is that our ship which we gave up for ruined only three hours ago is as well-outfitted and seaworthy as it was when we first set sail.", "prospero sir, i've done all this work for you since i left you last.", "ariel my clever spirit!", "these are unnatural events. they get stranger all the time. boatswain tell me, how did you get here?", "if i were sure i was wide awake, i'd try to tell you. we were fast asleep and somehow we don't know how we were stowed below deck, where we heard lots of roaring, shrieking, howling, and jingling chains. the sounds were so horrible that we woke up liberated, and saw our wonderful ship safe and sound. the master was dancing with joy to see it. in an instant we were separated from them, as if in a dream, and brought here in a daze.", "prospero did i do it right?", "ariel you did it perfectly, my little worker. you'll get your freedom."], ["this is a stranger business than men have ever set foot in before, and it's not natural either. we need some oracle to tell us what's going on.", "sir, my king, don't waste your time mulling over how strange this business is. when the time is right, and it'll be soon, i promise i alone will explain everything that's happened. until then, be cheerful and keep an open mind. ariel come here, spirit; set caliban and his fellow slaves free. break the spell that enslaves them to me.", "how is my lord? there are a few men still missing from the ship, a few odd guys you've forgotten about.", "look out for the other guy, and don't put yourself first, since everything happens randomly. courage! courage, you fine old monster.", "if i can believe my eyes, this is a fine sight to see.", "oh setebos, these are handsome spirits! how wonderful my master is! i'm afraid he'll punish me."], ["ha, ha! what are these things we're looking at, my lord antonio? can you buy them with money?", "definitely. the one that looks like a fish is very marketable.", "take a look at their servants' name tags, my lords, then tell me what they are. caliban this misshapen monster, his mother was a witch so powerful she could control the moon and the tides. these three have robbed me, and this bastard half-devil plotted with them to kill me. two of these men you must recognize and claim as your own. this evil monster i acknowledge is mine.", "he'll kill me with tortures.", "isn't this stephano, my drunken butler?", "he's definitely drunk now. where did he get wine?", "and trinculo's drunk. where did they find the liquor to get drunk on? trinculo how did you get this way?", "i've been so wasted since i saw you last that i'm worried i'll never be sober again. but at least i won't rot, being so full of alcohol.", "how are you doing, stephano?"], ["oh, don't touch me. i'm not stephano, i'm a walking cramp.", "you wanted to be king of the island, sir?", "i would've been a sore king then.", "caliban this is the strangest thing i ever saw in my life.", "he's as ugly in his manners as he is in appearance. caliban go, sir, to my room, and take your companions with you. if you want me to forgive you, make it neat and tidy.", "i will indeed. and after this i'll be good and hope you forgive me. what an idiot i was to think this drunkard was a god and to worship such a stupid fool!", "go away, now.", "stephano trinculo go, and put your garbage back where you found it.", "or stole it, rather.", "sir, i invite your highness and your entourage to my little room, where you can sleep tonight. but for this evening part of it, at least i'll tell you tales to make the time pass quickly. i'll narrate the story of my life, and give you all the details of what happened to me since i first came to this island. and in the morning i'll take you to your ship and we'll sail to naples, where i hope to see this loving couple married. after that i'll retire to milan, where i'll contemplate my death, which is soon to come."], ["i'm dying to hear your life story, which must be a strange tale.", "i'll tell you everything, and i promise to give you calm seas and favorable winds for your trip. you'll sail so fast that you'll catch up with the royal navy. ariel my ariel, baby, that job's for you. after that you'll be free as the air. farewell! please, all the rest of you, come closer."], ["now my spells are all broken, and the only power i have is my own, which is very weak. now you all have got the power to keep me prisoner here, or send me off to naples. please don't keep me here on this desert island with your magic spells. release me so i can return to my dukedom with your help. the gentle wind you blow with your applause will fill my ship's sails. without applause, my plan to please you has failed. now i have no spirits to enslave, no magic to cast spells, and i'll end up in despair unless i'm relieved by prayer, which wins over god himself and absolves all sins. just as you'd like to have your sins forgiven, indulge me, forgive me, and set me free."]], [["if it's true that music makes people more in love, keep playing. give me too much of it, so i'll get sick of it and stop loving. play that part again! it sounded sad. oh, it sounded like a sweet breeze blowing gently over a bank of violets, taking their scent with it. that's enough. stop. it doesn't sound as sweet as it did before. oh, love is so restless! it makes you want everything, but it makes you sick of things a minute later, no matter how good they are. love is so vivid and fantastical that nothing compares to it.", "do you want to go hunting, my lord?", "hunting what, curio?", "the .", "that's what i'm doing only it's heart that's being hunted. oh, when i first saw olivia, it seemed like she made the air around her sweeter and purer. in that instant i was transformed into a hart, and my desire for her has hounded me like a pack of vicious dogs."], ["what's going on? what have you heard from her?", "i'm sorry, but they wouldn't let me in. but i got the following answer from her handmaid. olivia's not going to show her face for the next seven years not even to the sky itself. instead, she'll go around veiled like a nun, and once a day she'll water her room with tears. she's doing this out of love for her dead brother, whom she wants to keep fresh in her memory forever.", "oh, if she loves her brother this much, think how she'll love me when i finally win her over and make her forget all her other attachments! her mind and heart will be ruled by one man alone me! take me to the garden. i need a beautiful place to sit and think about love."], ["what country is this, friends?", "this is illyria, lady.", "and what am i supposed to do in illyria? my brother is in heaven. or maybe there's a chance he didn't drown. what do you think, sailors?", "it was a total fluke that you yourself were saved.", "oh, my poor brother! but maybe by some fluke he was saved too.", "it's possible, ma'am. don't give up yet. when our ship was wrecked and you and a few other survivors were clinging onto our lifeboat, i saw your brother tie himself to a big mast floating in the sea. he was acting resourcefully and courageously in a dangerous situation. for as long as i could see him, he stayed afloat on the waves like on the dolphin's back.", "thank you for saying that here's some money to express my gratitude. since i survived, it's easier for me to imagine he survived too, and what you say gives me a reason to hope for the best. do you know this area we're in?", "yes, ma'am, i know it well. i was born and raised less than three hours from here."], ["who's the ruler here?", "a duke who is noble in name and character.", "what's his name?", "orsino.", "orsino. i've heard my father mention him. when i first heard about him, he was still a bachelor.", "he's still a bachelor, or at least he was a month ago, when i left. but there was a rumor you know, people always gossip about royalty that he was in love with the beautiful olivia.", "who's she?", "a virtuous young woman, the daughter of a count who died last year. her brother had custody of her for a while, but then he died too. they say she's totally sworn off men now, in memory of her brother.", "i wish i could work for that lady! it'd be a good way to hide from the world until the time was right to identify myself.", "that would be hard to do. she won't allow anyone in to see her, not even the duke's messengers."], ["you seem to be a good person, captain, and although people who look beautiful are often corrupt inside, i believe that you have a beautiful mind to go with your good looks and manners. please and i'll pay you plenty for this help me conceal my identity, and find me the right disguise so i can look the way i want. i want to be this duke's servant. you'll introduce me to him as a eunuch. you won't be wasting your time, because i really can sing and talk to him about many different kinds of music, so he'll be happy to have me in his service. only time will tell what will happen after that just please keep quiet about what i'm trying to do.", "i won't say a word. you can be a eunuch, but i'll be mute. i swear on my life i won't tell your secret.", "thank you. show me the way."], ["what's wrong with my niece? why is she reacting so strangely to her brother's death? grief is bad for people's health.", "for god's sake, sir toby, you've got to come home earlier at night. my lady olivia, your niece, disapproves of your late-night partying.", "well, she can get used to it.", "yes, but you need to keep yourself within the limits of order and decency.", "keep myself? the only thing i'm keeping myself in is the clothes i'm wearing. they're good enough to drink in, and so are these boots. if they aren't, they can go hang themselves by their own laces!", "you're going to destroy yourself with all this drinking. lady olivia said so yesterday. she also mentioned some stupid knight you brought in one night as a possible husband for her.", "who, sir andrew aguecheek?", "yes, that's the one.", "he's as as a man in illyria."], ["what does his height have to do with anything?", "why, he has an income of three thousand ducats a year.", "i bet he'll spend his whole inheritance in a year. he's a fool and a spendthrift.", "you shouldn't talk about him like that! he plays the violin and speaks three or four languages word for word without a dictionary. he has all of nature's best gifts.", "right he's a natural-born idiot. besides being a fool, he's argumentative. if he didn't have the coward's gift for backing down from a fight, they say he'd be dead by now.", "anyone who says that is a lying piece of garbage. who said that?", "the same people who say he gets drunk with you every night.", "we only drink toasts to my niece. i'll drink to her as long as there's a hole in my throat and booze in illyria. anyone who refuses to drink to my niece until his brain spins around like a merry-go-round is scum. but speak of the devil, here comes sir andrew agueface.", "sir toby belch! how are you, sir toby belch?", "sweet sir andrew!"], ["maria and hello to you, my little wench.", "hello, sir.", "chat her up, sir andrew. chat her up.", "what?", "this is my niece's maid.", "my dear miss chat-her-up, i look forward to getting to know you better.", "my name is mary, sir.", "miss mary chat-her-up", "no, you've got it wrong. when i said \"chat her up,\" i wasn't saying her name. i was telling you to go after her, woo her, confront her.", "good heavens, i'd never do that with people watching. is that really what you meant?", "goodbye, gentlemen.", "she's leaving. if you let her go this easily, sir andrew, you don't deserve to ever use your sword again.", "if you leave like this, my dear, i won't ever use my sword again. i'm not just talking nonsense to you, i mean everything i say. do you think you've got a couple of fools on your hands here?", "i'm not holding your hand, sir."], ["but you will. here's my hand.", "a girl's got a right to her opinions. take your hand to a bar and put a drink in it.", "why, sweetheart? is there a hidden meaning in this?", "you're not holding a glass. your hand is , sir.", "well, i hope so. i'm not such an idiot that i can't keep my hands dry. but i don't get it what's the joke?", "just a bit of my dry humor, sir.", "are you always so funny?", "yes, i've got a handful of jokes. but oops, when i let go of your hand, i let go of the biggest joke of all.", "sir, you need a drink. when has anyone ever put you down like that.", "never. i've only been that far down when i've drunk myself under the table. sometimes i think i'm no smarter than average. i eat a lot of red meat, and maybe that makes me stupid.", "absolutely."], ["if i really believed that, i'd give up red meat totally. by the way, i'm going home tomorrow, sir toby.", ", my friend?", "what does mean? does it mean i will or i won't? oh, i wish i'd spent as much time learning languages as i spent on fencing, dancing, and ! if only i'd taken school more seriously!", "you'd have a great hairstyle if you had.", "why, would that have fixed my hair?", "oh, no question it won't style itself.", "but my hair looks good anyway, doesn't it?", "it looks great. it hangs like an old worn-out mop. some woman should give you syphilis so you go bald.", "listen, i'm going home tomorrow, sir toby. your niece is refusing to see anyone, and even if she saw me, ten to one she'd want nothing to do with me. that duke who lives nearby is courting her.", "she's not interested in the duke. she doesn't want to marry anyone of higher social rank than her, or anyone richer, older, or smarter. i've heard her say that. so cheer up, there's still hope for you, man."], ["all right, i'll stay another month. ah, i'm an odd kind of guy. sometimes all i want to do is see plays and go out dancing.", "are you good at those kinds of things?", "yes, as good as any man in illyria, except for the ones who are better at it than i am. i'm not as good as someone who's been dancing for years.", "how good are you at those fast dances?", "believe me, i can .", "and i can cut some meat to go with your .", "and i can do that fancy backward step as well as any man in illyria.", "why do you hide these things? why do you keep these talents behind a curtain? are they likely to get dusty? why don't you go off to church dancing one way, and come home dancing another way? if i had your talents, i'd be dancing a jig every time i walked down the street. i wouldn't even pee without dancing a waltz. what are you thinking? is this the kind of world where we hide our accomplishments? you're a born dancer. look how shapely your legs are.", "that's true. they're strong, and they look pretty good in brown tights. should we throw a little dance party?", "why not? weren't we both born under taurus?"], ["taurus! that governs the torso and heart, doesn't it?", "no, the legs and thighs. let me see you dance. sir andrew ha, higher! ha, ha, excellent!"], ["if the duke keeps treating you so well, cesario, you'll go far. he's only known you for three days, but he's already treating you like a close friend.", "when you wonder whether he'll keep treating me well, it makes me think his mood might change or else i'll mess up somehow. do his feelings toward people change suddenly?", "no, not at all.", "thanks for telling me. here comes the duke now.", "has anyone seen cesario?", "i'm right here, my lord, at your service.", "viola we'll need some privacy for a little while. viola cesario, i want a word with you. you know everything about me. i've told you all the secrets of my soul. so please go to her house; if they don't let you in, plant yourself outside her door and tell them you won't leave until they let you see her."], ["but my lord, i'm sure that if she's as depressed as people say, she'll never let me in.", "be loud and obnoxious. do whatever it takes, just get the job done.", "well, all right, let's say hypothetically that i do get a chance to speak with her, my lord. what do i do then?", "tell her how passionately i love her. overwhelm her with examples of how faithful i am. the best thing would be to act out my feelings for her. she'll pay more attention to a young guy like you than to an older, more serious man.", "i don't think so, my lord.", "my boy, it's true. anyone who says you're a man must not notice how young you are. your lips are as smooth and red as the goddess diana's. your soft voice is like a young girl's, high and clear, and the rest of you is pretty feminine too. i know you're the right person for this job. curio four or five of you go along with him, or you can all go if you like. i'm most comfortable when i'm alone. viola if you succeed at this assignment, i'll reward you well. my whole fortune will be yours.", "i'll do my best to make this lady love you. but what a tough task! i have to go matchmaking for the man i want to marry myself!"], ["no. either tell me where you've been, or i won't make any excuses for you to lady olivia. lady olivia will have you executed for not showing up.", "so let her execute me. anyone who's executed doesn't have to be afraid of anything he sees.", "how do you know?", "well, he'll be dead, so he won't see anything.", "that's a lame answer. by the way, i know where you get all your brave talk about not being afraid of anything.", "where, good miss mary?", "from soldiers. but you'll never see the front lines. it's easy for you to talk about bravery, working as a fool in this palace.", "well, we all have our special gifts. some people are born wise; those of us who were meant to be fools should do what they do best.", "but still, she's going to kill you for being gone so long. or at least fire you. and wouldn't that be as bad for you as being killed?"], ["sometimes getting killed is a good way to avoid getting married. and as for being fired, it's summer, so it won't be that bad to be homeless.", "you've made up your mind, then?", "no, but i've made up my mind on two points.", "ah yes, the two points where your suspenders are attached to your buttons. if one breaks, the other will hold, but if both points break, your pants will fall down.", "clever, very clever. well, go along now. you'd be the funniest person in illyria if sir toby ever stopped drinking.", "shut up, you troublemaker, no more of that. here comes my lady. if you know what's good for you, you'll think up some good excuse for being away so long.", "please, let me think of something funny to say now! smart people who think they're witty often turn out to be fools, but i know i'm not witty, so i might pass for smart. what did that philosopher say? ah yes, \"a witty fool's better than a foolish wit.\"", "greetings to you, madam!"], ["get that fool out of here.", "didn't you hear her, guys? get the lady out of here.", "oh, go away, you're a boring fool. i don't want to have anything to do with you anymore. besides, you've gotten unreliable.", "madam, those are two character flaws that a little booze and some common sense can fix. if you hand a drink to a sober fool, he won't be thirsty anymore. if you tell a bad man to mend his wicked ways, and he does, he won't be bad anymore. if he cannot, let the tailor mend him. anything that's mended is only patched up. a good person who does something wrong is only patched up with sin. and a sinner who does something good is only patched up with goodness. if this logic works, that's great. if not, what can you do about it? since the only real betrayed husband in the world is the one deserted by lady luck because we're all married to her beauty is a flower. the lady gave orders to take away the fool, so i'm telling you again, take her away.", "i told them to take away.", "oh, what a big mistake! madam, you can't judge a book by its cover. i mean, i may look like a fool, but my mind's sharp. please let me prove you're a fool.", "can you do that?", "easily, madam."], ["then go ahead and prove it.", "i'll have to ask you some questions, madam. please answer, my good little student.", "i'm listening to you only because i've got nothing better to do.", "my dear madam, why are you in mourning?", "my dear fool, because my brother died.", "i think his soul's in hell, my lady.", "i know his soul's in heaven, fool.", "then you're a fool for being sad that your brother's soul is in heaven. take away this fool, gentlemen.", "what do you think of this fool, malvolio? isn't he getting funnier?", "yes, and he'll keep getting funnier till he dies. old age always makes people act funny even wise people, but fools more than anybody.", "i hope you go senile soon, sir, so you can become a more foolish fool! sir toby would bet a fortune that i'm not smart, but he wouldn't bet two cents that you're not a fool.", "what do you say to that, malvolio?", "i'm surprised you enjoy the company of this stupid troublemaker. the other day i saw him defeated in a"], ["battle of wits by an ordinary jester with no more brains than a rock. look at him, he's at a loss for words already. unless he's got somebody laughing at him, he can't think of anything to say. i swear, anyone smart who laughs at these courts jesters is nothing but a jester's apprentice.", "malvolio, your vanity is damaging your good taste. if you were generous, innocent, and good-natured, you wouldn't get so upset by what the fool says. you'd think of his wisecracks as harmless little firecrackers, not hurtful bullets. a court jester isn't really criticizing people, even if he does nothing but make fun of them all day long. and a wise person doesn't make fun of people, even if all he does is criticize them.", "you speak so highly of fools! i hope the god of deception rewards you by making you a wonderful liar.", "madam, there's a young gentleman at the gate who really wants to speak to you.", "was he sent by count orsino?", "i don't know, madam. he's a good-looking young man, and there are a lot of people with him.", "who's talking to him now?", "sir toby, madam, your relative.", "send toby away, please. he talks nothing but nonsense."], ["go out and talk to this visitor, malvolio. if he's got a message from the count, tell him i'm sick, or not home. tell him anything you want, as long as you make him go away.", "now you see how your fooling gets boring, and people don't like it.", "madam, you've spoken so highly of us fools, you'd think your oldest son was going into that line of work. i hope god crams his skull full of brains, because here comes one of your relatives who's pretty weak in the head.", "i swear, he's half drunk already. who's that at the gate, uncle?", "a gentleman.", "a gentleman? what gentleman?", "there's some gentleman out there. damn these pickled herring! they upset my stomach. how's it going, fool?", "good sir toby!", "uncle, uncle, how are you already so brain-dead so early in the day?"], ["brain-dead! nonsense. i defy brain-death! i told you, someone's at the gate.", "yes, but who is he?", "let him be the devil if he wants to, i don't care. god will protect me. what do i care who it is?", "tell me what a drunk is like, fool.", "he's a fool, a madman, and a drowned man. the first drink makes him a fool, the second makes him crazy, and the third drowns him.", "go find the coroner and tell him to perform an inquest on my uncle, because he's in the third degree of drunkenness he's drowned. go take care of him.", "he's still only in the crazy phase. the fool will go take care of the madman.", "madam, that young man out there says he's got to speak to you. i told him you were sick. he claimed he knew that, and that's why he's come to speak with you. i told him you were asleep. he claimed to know that already too, and said that's the reason he's come to speak with you. what can i say to him, lady? he's got an answer for everything."], ["tell him he's not going to speak with me.", "i told him that. he says he'll stand at your door like a signpost or a bench until he speaks with you.", "what kind of man is he?", "just a man, like any other.", "but what's he like?", "he's very rude. he insists he'll speak with you whether you want him to or not.", "what does he look like? how old is he?", "not old enough to be a man, but not young enough to be a boy. he's like a bud before it becomes a pea pod, or like a little green apple before it gets big and ripe. he's somewhere between boy and man. he's very handsome and speaks well, but he's very young. he looks like he just recently stopped breastfeeding.", "show him in. call in my maid.", "maria, our lady wants you.", "give me my veil. come, put it over my face. olivia we're going to hear orsino's pleas again."], ["which one of you is the lady of the house?", "you can speak to me. i represent her. what do you want?", "what stunning, exquisite, and unmatchable beauty but please, tell me if you're the lady of the house, because i've never seen her. i'd hate to waste my speech on the wrong person, because it's very well written and i spent a lot of time and energy memorizing it. beautiful ladies, please don't treat me badly. i'm very sensitive, and even the smallest bit of rudeness hurts my feelings.", "where do you come from, sir?", "i'm sorry, but i memorized what i'm supposed to say here today, and that question isn't part of the speech i learned. please, my lady, just confirm that you're the lady of the house so i can get on with my speech.", "are you an actor?", "no, madam. but i swear i'm not the person i'm playing. are you the lady of the house?", "i am, unless i somehow stole this role.", "if you're the lady of the house, then it's true you're stealing your role, because what's yours to give away is not yours to keep for yourself. but that's not part of what i'm supposed to say. i'll go on with my speech praising you, and then i'll get to the point."], ["get to the point now. i'll let you get away with skipping the praise.", "that's too bad, because i spent a long time memorizing it, and it's poetic.", "that means it's more likely to be fake. please, keep it to yourself. i heard you were rude when you were standing outside my gate, and that's the only reason i let you in. i was curious. but i don't necessarily want to listen to you. if you're just insane, then get out of here. if you're in your right mind, get to the point. i've got no patience for lunacy at the moment, and i don't want to waste my time on ridiculous conversations.", "ready to set sail, sir? the door's right here.", "no, this boat's docking here a bit longer, little sailor. my lady, would you mind asking your giant here to back off a bit?", "tell me what you want.", "i have a message to deliver.", "it must be a message about something horrible, since you deliver it so rudely. tell me what it's about.", "it's about you. i'm not bringing any declarations of war or demands for cash. i'm coming in peace.", "but you began so rudely. who are you? what do you want?"], ["if i seemed rude, it's because of how badly i was treated when i got here. who i am and what i want are a secret. you're the only one i can share the secret with. it's sacred, just for you. it's not for anyone else to hear.", "everyone, please leave us alone for a moment. i've got a \"sacred\" secret to hear.", "now, sir, what's this holy secret you wanted to tell me?", "most sweet lady", "oh, \"sweet\"! it sounds like a nice and gentle kind of faith. where's the passage of holy scripture that you're basing your sermon on?", "in orsino's heart.", "in his heart? in what chapter and verse of his heart?", "the table of contents says it's in the first chapter of his heart.", "oh, i've read that. that's not holy, it's heresy. do you have anything else to say?", "madam, please let me see your face.", "has your lord given you any orders to negotiate with my face? i don't think so. you're overstepping your bounds now. but i'll open the curtain and let you see the picture. look, sir, this is a portrait of me as i am at this particular moment. it's pretty well done, isn't it?"], ["it was done excellently, if it's all-natural, the way god made it.", "oh, it's all-natural, sir. wind and rain can't wash it off.", "that's true beauty. mother nature herself painted your skin so white and your lips so red. my lady, you'd be the cruelest woman alive if you let your beauty die with you, with no children to inherit your good looks for future generations to enjoy.", "oh, i'd never be that cruel. i'll definitely do as you say and leave my beauty for the rest of the world to enjoy. i'll write out a detailed inventory of my beauty and label every part. for example : two lips, ordinary red. : two gray eyes, with lids on them. : one neck, one chin, and so on. anyway, were you sent here just to tell me i'm beautiful?", "i see what you're like. you're proud. but you'd still be gorgeous even if you were as proud as the devil. my lord loves you. you should return a love as deep as his, even if you're the most beautiful woman in the world.", "how does he love me?", "he adores you. he cries and groans and sighs.", "your lord knows what i think. i can't love him. i'm sure he's a very nice man. i know he's noble, rich, young, and with a fine reputation. people say he's generous, well educated, and brave, and he's very attractive."], ["but i just can't love him. he should have resigned himself to that a long time ago.", "if i loved you as passionately as my master does, and suffered like he does, your rejection would make no sense to me. i wouldn't understand it.", "what would you do about it?", "i'd build myself a sad little cabin near your house, where my soul's imprisoned. from that cabin i'd call out to my soul. i'd write sad songs about unrequited love and sing them loudly in the middle of the night. i'd shout your name to the hills and make the air echo with your name, \"olivia!\" oh, you wouldn't be able to go anywhere without feeling sorry for me.", "not bad; you might accomplish something. who are your parents?", "i was born to a higher position than i've got now. but i'm still fairly high-ranking. i'm a gentleman.", "go back to your lord. i can't love him. tell him not to send any more messengers unless you feel like coming back to tell me how he took the bad news. goodbye. thanks for your trouble. here's some money for you."], ["i'm not a paid messenger, my lady. keep your money. it's my master who's not getting the reward he deserves, not me. i hope you fall in love with a man whose heart is hard as a rock and who treats your love like a big joke, just like you've done. goodbye, you beautiful, cruel woman.", "\"who are your parents?\" \"i was born to a higher position than i've got now. but i'm still fairly high-ranking. i'm a gentleman.\" yes, i'm sure you are. your way of talking, your face, your body, your behavior, and your sensitive soul all prove you're a gentleman. ah, no. calm down, calm down. if only his lord were more like him. how strange i'm feeling! can someone fall in love this quickly? i can feel this young man's perfection creeping in through my eyes like some kind of disease, slowly and invisibly. oh, well. malvolio! come here!", "at your service, madam.", "run after that obnoxious messenger, the duke's servant. he insisted on leaving this ring with me whether i wanted it or not. tell him i want nothing to do with it. ask him not to encourage orsino or to get his hopes up. i'm not for him. if that young man comes here again tomorrow, i'll tell him why. hurry, malvolio."], ["madam, i will.", "i don't know what i'm doing. i'm afraid i'm not using my head, and i'm falling for his good looks. fate, do your work. we human beings don't control our own destinies. what is fated to happen must happen. so let it happen!"], ["you won't stay any longer? and you don't want me to come with you?", "no, i'd rather you stayed here. my luck is pretty bad right now, and it might rub off on you. so just let me say goodbye and face the bad stuff alone otherwise i wouldn't be thanking you very well for all you've done for me.", "at least tell me where you're going.", "honestly, i can't. i'm just wandering, with no particular destination. but i know you'd never force me to tell you things i don't want to, so i should be polite and tell you what i can. my name's sebastian, though i've been calling myself roderigo. my father was sebastian of messaline. i know you've heard of him. he's dead now. he left behind myself and my twin sister, who was born in the same hour as me. if god had been willing, i wish we had died in the same hour too! but you kept that from happening. an hour before you pulled me out of the breaking waves, my sister drowned.", "how tragic!"], ["although many people said she looked like me, she was considered beautiful. and though i can't believe everything people said about her beauty, i'll be so bold as to say she had a beautiful mind. even those who were jealous of her would have to admit that. she's been drowned in salty sea water, and now my salty tears are about to drown her memory all over again.", "i'm sorry i wasn't a better host for you, sir.", "oh, antonio, i'm sorry i caused you so much trouble.", "i care about you a lot. please let me be your servant so i can be with you. you'll be killing me if you don't.", "if you don't want to break my heart, then say goodbye to me right now. i like you very much. i'm really about to cry, just like my mother would do. i'm going to count orsino's court. goodbye.", "i wish you all the best. if i didn't have so many enemies in orsino's court, i'd go join you there. but who cares. i'm so crazy about you that danger doesn't bother me. i'll go anyway."], ["excuse me, weren't you with countess olivia just now?", "yes, sir. i've only made it this far since i left her place, walking at a moderate pace.", "she's sending this ring back to you, sir. you should've saved me some trouble and taken it away yourself. she wants you to make it very clear to your lord that she wants nothing to do with him, and that you should never come again on his behalf, unless you want to come back to tell her how he reacted to the bad news. here, take the ring.", "she took that ring from me. i won't take it back.", "you threw it at her rudely, and she wants you to take it back. if it's worth bending over to pick up, there it is on the ground, where you can see it. if not, whoever finds it can have it.", "i didn't give her any ring. what's she trying to say? i hope she doesn't have a crush on me! it's true she looked at me a lot, in fact, she looked at me so much that she seemed distracted, and couldn't really finish her sentences very well. oh, i really think she loves me! she sent this rude messenger to tell me to come back, instead of coming herself, which would be indis-"], ["creet. she doesn't want orsino's ring! orsino never sent her a ring. i'm the man she wants. if that's true, which it is, she might as well be in love with a dream, the poor lady. now i understand why it's bad to wear disguises. disguises help the devil do his work. it's so easy for a good-looking but deceitful man to make women fall in love with him. it's not our fault we women are weak. we can't help what we're made of. ah, how will this all turn out? my lord loves her, and. poor me, i love him just as much. and she's deluded enough to be in love with me. what can possibly fix this situation? i'm pretending to be a man, so my love for the duke is hopeless. and since i'm a woman too bad i'm a woman olivia's love for me is hopeless as well! oh, only time can sort out this mess. i can't figure it out by myself!"], ["come on, sir andrew. if we're still awake after midnight, then we're up early in the morning. and the doctors say it's healthy to get up early", "i don't know what the doctors say. all i know is that staying up late is staying up late.", "a false conclusion. i hate your logic as much as i hate an empty drinking cup. staying up after midnight means that you go to bed after midnight, in the wee hours of the morning, which is early. so it's like going to bed early. isn't everybody made up of the four elements earth, water, fire, and air?", "that's what they say, but i think life consists of food and booze.", "you're a smart guy. so we should eat and drink. maria! bring us some wine!", "look, here comes the fool.", "hello, my friends! what a pretty picture, three fools all together.", "hello, you idiot. sing us a song."], ["i swear, this fool has an excellent singing voice. i'd give forty shillings to have his nice legs and his beautiful voice. fool fool, you were very funny last night talking that about pigrogromitus and the vapians passing the equinox of queubus. very amusing. i sent you some money to spend on your girlfriend. did you get it?", "i gave your little present to my girlfriend because you can't get a grip on malvolio's nose to whip your horse with it. my girlfriend has beautiful white hands, and great warriors aren't , you know.", "ha, ha! i love it when you talk nonsense that's what fools should do. come on now, sing for us.", "fool yes, come on. here's sixpence for you. let's hear a song.", "fool here's something from me too. if one knight gives", "would you rather hear a love song or a song about the good life?", "a love song, a love song.", "yes, yes. i'm not interested in being good.", ""], ["that was excellent, really excellent.", "good, very good.", "", "a beautiful voice, i swear.", "his breath stinks.", "yes, it stinks very sweetly.", "if we could listen to him with our noses, we would definitely say he stinks very sweetly. so what do you say, should we sing loud enough to shake the heavens? should we sing a round to wake up the night owl? should we do that?", "let's go for it. i'm a very good singer, and can sing rounds like a .", "then you'll be good at catchy tunes. dogs like to play catch.", "absolutely. let's dance to \"you jerk.\"", "you mean, \"shut up, you jerk\"? that's the song where the singers call each other jerks, right? so i'll be forced to call you a jerk, sir andrew."], ["it won't be the first time someone was forced to call me that. you start, fool. it starts, \"shut up.\"", "i'll never be able to start if i shut up.", "that's true. but come on, start.", "you're making a terrible racket out here! lady olivia told her servant malvolio to kick you out of the house. i swear it's true.", "lady olivia can go to china for all i care. we're very smart guys, and malvolio's little bo peep. aren't i her relative, after all? aren't we related? fiddle-dee-dee, \"lady!\"", "gosh, the knight's very good at acting like a fool.", "yes, he's good at it when he's in the mood, and so am i. he's practiced more, but it comes more naturally to me.", "", "for god's sake, shut up!"], ["are you all crazy? what's wrong with you? are you making all this noise at this time of night because you have no manners, or because you're just stupid? are you trying to turn my mistress's house into a noisy bar? is that why you're squealing out these ridiculous vulgar songs without lowering your voices at all? don't you have any respect for anything?", "we respected the beat of the song, sir. so shut up!", "sir toby, i've got to be frank with you. my lady told me to tell you that while she lets you stay at her house because you're a relative, she doesn't approve of your behavior. if you can shape up, you're welcome to stay in the house. if you can't, and would prefer to leave, she's very willing to say goodbye to you.", "", "no, good sir toby.", "", "is this how it's going to be?", "", "", "this behavior really makes you look great."], ["", "", "", "", "that's out of tune, sir. you lie. ( malvolio) you're nothing more than a servant here. do you think that just because you're a goody two shoes, no one else can enjoy himself?", "they certainly will. they'll have double helpings, too.", "you're right. malvolio go polish your steward's chain, sir. maria, bring us some wine!", "miss mary, if you cared what lady olivia thinks about you at all, you wouldn't contribute to this rude behavior. i assure you, she'll find out about this.", "go and wiggle your ears!", "there's nothing i'd love more than to make a fool out of that guy somehow. i could challenge him to a duel and then not show up. that would do the trick.", "do that. i'll write a letter challenging him to a duel on your behalf. or i'll deliver your insults to his face."], ["dear sir toby, don't do anything rash tonight. ever since the duke's messenger visited olivia, she's been upset. as for monsieur malvolio, let me take care of him. i'll make a big fool out of him, just trust me. i'll make him famous for his stupidity. everyone will laugh at him. i know i can do it.", "tell us something about him. come on, tell us something.", "well, sometimes he acts like a goody two shoes.", "oh, i'll beat him up for that!", "you're going to beat him up for being good? and what's your brilliant reason for that, please?", "i don't have any \"brilliant\" reason for it, but i have a good enough reason.", "he isn't really that pure and good. he's just a conceited flatterer. he's a pretentious guy who aspires to speak and act like nobility. he's proud, and he thinks he's so stuffed full of wonderful qualities that everyone loves him. that's the weakness i'll use to get revenge on him.", "what are you going to do?", "i'll drop some mysterious love letters in his path. he'll think they're addressed to him, because they'll describe the color of his beard, the shape of his legs, the way he walks, and the expression on his face. i can make my handwriting look just like lady olivia's: she"], ["and i can't tell the difference between each other's handwriting.", "excellent! sounds like you've got a good trick in mind.", "i like it too.", "he'll think these letters are from olivia and that she's in love with him.", "yes, that's the idea.", "he's going to look like a total idiot.", "absolutely, you idiot.", "this is going to be great!", "it's going to be fun, i promise. i know my medicine will work on him. i'll have you two hide and the fool too right where he'll find the letter. watch his reaction. meanwhile, let's go to bed and dream about this. good night.", "good night, you amazing woman, you.", "she's a fine woman, all right.", "she's a good little woman, and she adores me. what about it?", "someone adored me once, too."], ["let's go to bed, knight. tomorrow you need to get more money sent to you.", "if i can't persuade your niece to marry me, i'm going to be in some serious financial trouble.", "get your hands on some money and everything will be all right. i know you'll win over olivia in the end.", "i know i will too, if it's the last thing i do.", "come on, i'll go warm up a nice glass of sherry for us. it's too late to go to bed now. come on, my friend, come on."], ["play me some music. good morning, my friends. have them sing me that song again, cesario, that old-fashioned song someone sang last night. it made me feel better and took my mind off my troubles much better than the silly songs they sing nowadays. please, have them sing just one verse.", "sir, the person who should sing that song isn't here.", "who was it?", "feste, the jester, my lord. olivia's father used to like him. he's somewhere else in the house.", "then go find him. meanwhile, play the tune.", "( viola come here, boy. if you ever fall in love and feel the bittersweet pain it brings, think of me. because the way i am now, moody and unable to focus on anything except the face of the woman i love, is exactly how all true lovers are. what do you think of this song?", "it really makes you feel what a lover feels."], ["you're absolutely right. i'd bet my life that, as young as you are, you've fallen in love with someone. haven't you, boy?", "a little bit.", "what kind of woman is she?", "she's a lot like you.", "she's not good enough for you, then. how old is she?", "about as old as you are, my lord.", "that's definitely too old. a woman should always pick an older man. that way she'll adjust herself to what her husband wants, and the husband will be happy and faithful to her. because however much we like to brag, boy, the truth is that we men change our minds a lot more than women do, and our desires come and go a lot faster than theirs.", "i think you're right, sir.", "so find someone younger to love, or you won't be able to maintain your feelings. women are like roses: the moment their beauty is in full bloom, it's about to decay.", "that's true. it's too bad their beauty fades right when it reaches perfection!"], ["my friend, sing us the song you sang last night. listen to it carefully, cesario, it's a simple old song. spinners and knitters used to sing it while they sewed, and maidens used to sing it over their weaving. it tells the simple truth about innocent love, as it was in the good old days.", "are you ready, sir?", "yes. please, sing.", "", "fool here's some money for your trouble."], ["no trouble, sir. i like singing.", "then i'll pay you for doing what you like.", "well, in that case, all right. we all pay for what we like sooner or later.", "you may leave.", "i'll pray for the god of sadness to protect you, sir. and i hope your tailor will make you an outfit out of fabric that changes color, because your mind is like an opal that changes colors constantly. men as wonderfully changeable as you are should all go drifting on the sea, where they can do whatever comes their way, and go wherever the current takes them. those are the men whose trips are always successful. goodbye.", "all the rest of you can leave too.", "cesario, go visit that cruel olivia one more time. tell her my love is purer than anything else in the whole world, and has nothing to do with her property. the wealth she's inherited isn't what makes me value her. it's her rich, jewel-like beauty that attracts me.", "but if she can't love you, sir?"], ["i refuse to accept that.", "but you have to. just imagine some lady might exist who loves you as powerfully and agonizingly as you love olivia. but you can't love her, and you tell her so. shouldn't she just accept that?", "no woman is strong enough to put up with the kind of intense passion i feel. no woman's heart is big enough to hold all my love. women don't feel love like that love is as shallow as appetite for them. it has nothing to do with their hearts, just their sense of taste. they eat too much and get indigestion and nausea. but my love's different. it's as all-consuming and insatiable as the sea, and it can swallow as much as the sea can. don't compare a woman's love for a man with my love for olivia.", "yes, but i know", "what do you know?", "i know a lot about the love women can feel for men. actually, their hearts are as sensitive and loyal as ours are. my father had a daughter who loved a man in the same way that i might love you, if i were a woman.", "and what's her story?"], ["there was no story, my lord. she never told him she loved him. she kept her love bottled up inside her until it destroyed her, ruining her beauty. she pined away. she just sat waiting patiently, sadly, smiling despite her sadness. her complexion turned greenish from depression. doesn't that sound like true love? we men might talk more and promise more, but in fact we talk more than we really feel. we might be great at making vows, but our love isn't sincere.", "but did your sister die of love?", "i am the only daughter in my father's family, and all the brothers too but i'm not completely sure about that. anyway, sir, should i go see the lady?", "yes, go quickly and give her this jewel. tell her my love won't go away and won't be denied."], ["come along with us, signor fabian.", "i'm coming, don't worry. if i miss this, let me be boiled alive.", "won't you be glad to see that rascal dog humiliated?", "i'll be thrilled. you know, he got me in trouble with the lady of the house once when i arranged a bear-baiting here.", "we'll have another bear-baiting just to make him angry, and we'll mock him till he's black and blue. won't we, sir andrew?", "if we don't, it'll be the biggest disappointment of our lives.", "here comes the little villain herself.", "how are you, my golden girl?", "hide behind the boxwood hedge, all three of you. malvolio's coming down the path. he's been over there practicing how to act for the past half hour. watch him carefully if you want to have some fun, guys. this letter's going to turn him into a starry-eyed idiot. now hide, for god's sake!"], ["now, you lie there on the path. maria here comes the fish that's going to gobble up our bait.", "it's all luck. everything's luck. maria once told me olivia was fond of me. i've almost heard olivia say that herself. she said if she were interested in someone, it would be someone who looked like me. besides, she treats me more respectfully than the other servants. what's the obvious conclusion from that?", "what an egomaniac!", "shh! when he's alone with his thoughts, he's even more like a haughty peacock. watch him strut!", "i swear, i'd like to beat the jerk so hard!", "be quiet!", "just think, i could be count malvolio!", "ah, what a jerk!", "shoot him, just shoot him.", "shh, shh!"], ["after all, it wouldn't be the first time that kind of thing has happened. lady strachy married her wardrobe manager.", "damn him, the arrogant fool!", "shh! we've got him right where we want him. he's on a big ego trip.", "just think of me, having been married to her for three months, sitting around majestically", "if only i had a slingshot so i could hit him in the eye!", "calling my servants together, wearing an embroidered robe, having just come from a couch where i've left olivia sleeping", "that does it!", "oh, be quiet, be quiet!", "then i'd put on a lofty and exalted expression. i'd look around the room calmly, then tell them that i know my place, and i'd like them to know theirs. then i'd tell them to go find my cousin toby", "that really does it!", "oh, quiet, quiet! please, please."], ["i'd send seven of my servants to go get him. while i waited, i'd frown impatiently, and perhaps wind my watch, or play with my with some expensive piece of jewelry i happen to be wearing. toby would approach me. he'd bow to me", "are we going to let this guy live?", "yes, we have to be quiet, even if it's torture.", "i reach out my hand to him like this, giving him a stern look instead of my usual friendly smile", "and then doesn't toby punch you in the mouth?", "and i'd say to him, \"cousin toby, since i've been lucky enough to marry your niece, i have the right to say a few things to you \"", "oh yeah, like what?", "\"you must stop being such a drunk.\"", "get out of here, you scab!", "no, be quiet, or we'll screw up the joke.", "\"and you're wasting your time with that foolish knight \"", "that's me, i bet.", "\"that sir andrew \""], ["i knew he was talking about me. a lot of people call me foolish.", "( ) what's this?", "he's taking the bait.", "shhh! i hope he reads it out loud, to make it funnier!", "( ) my goodness, this is my lady's ! these are her c's, her u's and her t's, and that's how she makes her big p's. it's definitely her handwriting, no doubt about it.", "her c's, her u's, and her t's. why focus on that?", "to my dear beloved who doesn't know i love him, i send you this letter with all my heart\" that's exactly how she talks! excuse me, sealing wax. wait! this is the stamp my lady seals her letters with it has a picture of lucrece on it. this letter is from olivia. who is this written to?", "this'll get him.", "god knows i love someone. but who? i can't let my lips say his name; \"no man must know.\""], ["\"no man must know.\" what comes after that? look, the meter changes in her poem. \"no man must know.\" what if this someone were you, malvolio?", "go hang yourself, you stinking badger!", "\"i may order the one i love. but silence, like a knife, cuts open my heart with strokes that draw no blood. m.o.a.i. rules my life.\"", "what a pretentious riddle!", "that maria has outdone herself!", "\"m.o.a.i. rules my life.\" hmm, let me see, let me see, let me see.", "what a dish of poison she's mixed for him!", "and look how willingly he's taking the bait.", "\"i may command the one i love.\" well, she commands me. i'm her servant. she's my boss. why, anyone can see what this means. there's no ambiguity here. but the end, what do those letters mean? if only i could somehow relate them to me! hmm. m.o.a.i.", "oh, bad dog. he's losing the scent!", "he'll find it again, no matter how much it stinks."], ["\"m\" malvolio. \"m\" why, that's the first letter in my name.", "didn't i tell you he'd figure it out? this dog's excellent at following false leads.", "\"m.\" but then the next letter isn't the same. \"a\" should be next, but instead \"o\" comes next.", "and an \"o\" like a noose will end this, i hope.", "yeah, or i'll beat him up and make him yell \"oh!\"", "and then the \"i\" comes next.", "if you had an i in the back of your head, you'd see trouble behind you.", "m.o.a.i. this code's not as easy to crack as the other one. but if i shake it up a little it'll work, because every one of those letters is in my name. but wait, there's some prose after her poem.", "\"if this letter falls into your hands, think carefully about what it says. by my birth i rank above you, but don't be afraid of my greatness. some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them. your fate awaits you. accept it in body and spirit. to get used to the life you'll most likely be leading soon, get rid of your low-class trappings. show some eagerness for the new upscale lifestyle that's waiting"], ["for you. argue with a relative like a nobleman, and be rude to servants. talk about politics and affairs of state, and act free and independent. the woman who advises you to do this loves you. remember the woman who complimented you on your yellow stockings, and said she always wanted to see you with crisscrossing laces going up your legs remember her. go ahead. a happy new life is there if you want it. if you don't want it, just keep acting like a lowly servant who's not brave enough to grab the happiness there before him. goodbye. signed, she who would be your servant, the fortunate unhappy.\"", "this is as clear as sunlight in an open field. i'll do it. i'll be vain and proud, i'll read up on politics, i'll insult sir toby, i'll get rid of my lower-class friends, and i'll be the perfect man for her. i know i'm not fooling myself, or letting myself get carried away by my imagination, because every clue points to the fact that lady olivia loves me. she did compliment me on my yellow stockings recently, and she said she liked how the crisscross laces looked on my legs. that's her way of saying she loves me. oh, i thank my lucky stars, i'm so happy. for her i'll be strange and condescending, and i'll put on my yellow stockings and crisscross laces right away. thank god and my horoscope! here's a postscript!.", "\"you must have figured out who i am. if you love me, let me know by smiling at me. you're so attractive when you smile. please smile whenever you're near me, my dearest darling.\""], ["dear god, thank you! i'll do everything she wants me to do.", "i wouldn't have missed this even for a pension of thousands of pounds, to be paid by the shah of persia.", "i could marry that maria for thinking this up.", "so could i.", "and i wouldn't ask for any dowry except for her to play another trick like this one.", "neither would i.", "here she comes, the brilliant fool-catcher.", "may i kiss your feet?", "and i too?", "shall i be your slave?", "me too.", "you've made him so delusional he'll go crazy when he learns the truth."], ["did it really work?", "like medicine for a sick man.", "if you want to really have some fun, watch him next time he's near lady olivia. he'll show up in yellow stockings she hates yellow and with laces crisscrossing up his legs she hates that style of dress and he'll smile, which will go completely against her mood, since she's addicted to sadness now. she'll definitely get upset with him. if you want to watch, follow me.", "i'd follow you to the gates of hell, you sneaky little devil!", "i'll come too."], ["god bless you, my friend, and your music too. do you make your living by playing that drum?", "no, sir, i live by the church.", "oh, you're a clergyman?", "no, i live by the church because i live in a house, and my house is by the church.", "you could just as easily say that a king sleeps near a beggar if the beggar lives near him, or that the church is supported by your drum because it \"stands by\" your drum.", "you're right, sir. what a wonderful time to be alive! sentences can be turned inside out so easily nowadays!", "that's true. people who fool around with words too much can make words act like whores changing all the time, and immoral too.", "that's why i wish my sister didn't have a name, sir.", "why, man?"], ["well, her name's a word, and if you fooled around with it you might make her into a whore. but, you know, words have been rascals ever since people started using written contracts rather than their word of honor.", "why do you say that?", "honestly, sir, i'd need to use words to explain why, and since words are so unreliable and false, i'd rather avoid using them in a serious discussion.", "i bet you're a happy fellow who doesn't care about anything.", "you're wrong, sir, i do care about something. but i'll admit i don't care for you. if that means i don't care about anything, you should disappear right now, since you're nothing.", "aren't you lady olivia's fool?", "no, sir. lady olivia doesn't want to have anything to do with foolishness. so she won't have a fool until she gets married. fools are to husbands as anchovies are to sardines husbands are the bigger ones. i'm not her fool. i just make words into whores for her.", "i saw you at count orsino's recently."], ["i'm everywhere. foolishness is all over the world, just like sunshine. i'd be sorry if people thought your master was less familiar with foolishness than my mistress is. i think i saw you there, you wise man.", "oh no, if you're joking around with me, i'm leaving. wait, here's a coin for you.", "next time god sends out a shipment of hair, i hope he gives you a beard!", "oh, i know. seriously, i'm dying for one, i mean, i'm dying for a man who has a beard; i don't want one to grow on my chin. fool) is lady olivia inside?", "if i had two of these coins, do you think they'd breed more coins?", "yes, if you kept them together and invested them.", "i'd like to be like that famous pimp, lord pandarus, and get a .", "fool i get what you're driving at, sir. you're a very clever beggar.", "it shouldn't be too much to ask; i'm only begging for a beggar. they say cressida became a beggar in her old age. my lady olivia's inside, sir. i'll tell them where you come from, though i don't know who you are or what you want. i'd say i was \"out of my element,\" but that phrase is overused, so i'll say i'm \"out of my air.\""], ["this guy's wise enough to play the fool, and only clever people can do that. he pays attention to the mood and social rank of the person he's joking with, and also to the time of day. and he doesn't let go of his target when a distraction appears. his job requires as much effort and skill as any wise man's occupation could. and he shows he's very smart at playing the fool, while smart people look stupid when they play the fool.", "hello, sir.", "hello to you too, sir.", "may god protect you, sir.", "and you too, sir. i'm at your service.", "( ) oh, good, i am too.", "my niece would like you to come in to the house, if your business here has to do with her.", "i'm headed for your niece, sir. she's the reason i'm here.", "taste your legs, sir. please go inside."], ["taste my legs? my legs stand under me, but i don't understand what \"taste your legs\" means.", "i mean please go into the house, sir.", "i will. but now we don't have to!", "oh, beautiful and accomplished lady, may the heavens rain odors upon you!", "that young man's classy. \"rain odors.\" that's good.", "my message is not for anyone else to hear, my lady. it's only for your willing and receptive ear.", "odors,\" \"willing,\" and \"deserving.\" i'll have to remember those words so i can use them later myself.", "close the garden door and leave me alone to hear his message.", "give me your hand, sir.", "i give you my obedience and my humble service, madam.", "what's your name?"], ["cesario is my name your servant's name fair princess.", "my servant! the world's gone downhill since fake humility started passing for compliments. you're not my servant, young man. you're count orsino's servant.", "but he's your servant, so everything that's his must be yours too. your servant's servant is your servant, madam.", "as for him, i never think about him. as for his thoughts, i wish he'd think about nothing at all rather than think about me all the time.", "madam, i've come here to try to make you like him.", "oh, please, i'm begging you, don't mention him again. but if you want to tell me that someone else loves me, i'd enjoy hearing that more than i'd enjoy listening to angels sing.", "my dear lady", "please let me say something, i'm begging you. after you cast your magic spell on me last time, i sent you a ring. i fear it was a mistake, since i tricked my servant, myself, and you too. you probably think poorly of me after i forced that ring on you with such outrageous trickery. what else could you possibly think of me?"], ["haven't you totally dismissed my honor and integrity in your anger? for someone as intelligent as you the situation must be clear enough. i'm wearing my heart on my sleeve, and i can't hide my feelings. so let me hear what you have to say.", "i feel sorry for you.", "that's a step in the direction of love.", "no, not at all. it's a perfectly ordinary experience for us to feel sorry for our enemies.", "well, enough of my whining then. that's that! i was getting carried away with fantasies i didn't deserve to have. but i should consider myself lucky. it's much better to be destroyed by a noble enemy than by a cruel and heartless one. listen to that, the clock's scolding me for wasting my time loving you. don't worry, young man, i won't stalk you. and when you're older and wiser and ready for marriage, your future wife will have a fine husband. there's the way back home for you, due west.", "then west is where i'm headed! i wish you all the best. you do", "stay, please, tell me what you think of me.", "i think you're denying what you really are.", "if that's true, i think the same thing about you.", "you're right. i am not what i am.", "i wish you were what i wanted you to be!"], ["would it be better if i were that, instead of what i am? i wish i were something better, because right now i'm a big fool.", "oh, how beautiful he is even when he's angry and full of contempt! a murderer can hide his guilt longer than someone in love can hide her love. love shines brightly and can't be hidden. viola) cesario, i swear by the spring roses, by virginity, honor, truth, and everything, i swear i love you. i love you so much that i can't hide my passion for you, as clever as i am. don't assume that because i'm pursuing you there's no reason to pursue me. put two and two together and realize that asking for love is good, but getting it without asking is much better.", "and i swear by my youth and innocence that i've only got one heart and one love to give, and that i've never given them to a woman and never will. so goodbye, my lady. i won't ever come to complain about my lord's love for you again.", "then come again for another reason. you might still be able to make yourself fall in love with me, the person he loves, even though you hate me now."], ["no, i won't stay a second longer.", "why are you leaving, my angry friend?", "yes, you have to tell us why, sir andrew.", "well, because i saw your niece olivia treat the count's messenger better than she's ever treated me. i saw it in the orchard.", "did she see you there the whole time, old boy? tell me that.", "yes, she saw me quite clearly.", "well, that proves she's in love with you.", "are you trying to make fun of me?", "no, i'll prove it with airtight evidence and logical argument.", "and you can't deny evidence and argument they've been around since noah's ark.", "she flirted with the messenger boy to exasperate you, fire up your passions, and make you angry and jealous. you should have run up to her, unleashed a few excellent quips invented on the spot, and rendered the young man speechless."], ["that's what she was expecting, and you let her down. you wasted a golden opportunity, and now my lady thinks badly of you. you can only raise her opinion of you with some impressive act of courage or complicated intrigue.", "i'll have to do something courageous then, because i hate intrigue. i'd rather be a heretic than a schemer with fancy plots.", "well then, improve your situation with a show of courage. challenge the count's young servant to a fight. hurt him in eleven different places. my niece olivia will notice, and let me tell you, no matchmaker in the world can get you a woman faster than a reputation for courage.", "it's really the only way, sir andrew.", "will either of you give him the message that i'm challenging him to a duel?", "go ahead and write it down. make your handwriting look like a soldier's. be pointed and brief. it doesn't need to be witty as long as it's eloquent and imaginative. taunt him as much as you want, since you're only doing it in writing. it's fine if you refer to him as \"thou\" instead of write down as many lies as you can fit on a sheet of paper. go ahead, get on with it. you may be using an ordinary pen, but you can fill it with poison ink. now get busy.", "where will i find you when i've finished it?"], ["we'll come find you in the bedroom. go on.", "this precious little guy is putty in your hands, sir toby.", "he must like me, since he's let me spend two thousand of his ducats.", "his letter's going to be hilarious. but you're not going to deliver it, are you?", "never trust me again if i don't. and by all means see if you can get the young man to answer it. i don't think a team of oxen could get them close enough to fight. if you dissected andrew and found enough red blood in his for a flea to eat, then i'd eat the rest of his corpse. he's a coward.", "and his opponent, the young messenger, doesn't look like he'd be very aggressive in a fight.", "here comes my little bird.", "listen, if you want a good laugh and i mean a side-splitting one then follow me. that gullible idiot malvolio must have renounced christianity, since no christian could do such outrageous things as he's doing. he's wearing yellow stockings."], ["with crisscrossed laces?", "oh, he looks like a pathetic sunday school teacher. i've stalked him like a murderer, and he's done everything the letter told him to. he smiles so much his face has more lines in it than a map of the east indies. you've never seen anything like it. i can hardly keep myself from throwing things at him. i know that my lady's going to end up hitting him. and when she does, he'll imagine she's flirting with him.", "come on, take us to him."], ["i really didn't want to inconvenience you. but since you seem to enjoy helping me, i won't nag you to stop any more.", "i couldn't stay behind after you left. i just felt a sharp desire to follow you. it wasn't just that i wanted to see you, though i very much did want that. i was also worried about what might happen to you while you were traveling, since you're not familiar with this area, and it's rough and unwelcoming to a stranger with no guide. i followed you because i love you and i was worried about you.", "my friend antonio, all i can say is thank you. i know words are cheap. if i had any money i'd back up my gratitude with cash. anyway, what should we do? should we go see the sights in the town?", "we can do that tomorrow, sir. first we should make sure you have somewhere to stay.", "i'm not tired, and night is a long time away. come on, let's go see the sights."], ["i'm sorry, but i can't. you see, it's dangerous for me to walk in these streets. once in a battle at sea i did a lot of damage to count orsino's warships. if they arrested me here, it'd be the end of me.", "you probably killed a lot of his men?", "no, i didn't do anything as violent as that, though we would've been justified in shedding a little blood over the matter. the whole quarrel might have been resolved since then when we repaid what we stole from them which most of our city did, for the sake of friendly trade relations. i was the only one who refused to give back what i stole. that's why i'll pay dearly if they find me here.", "then don't make yourself too conspicuous.", "you're right. hang on a minute, here's some money for you. sebastian the best place to stay around here is an inn called the elephant, in the suburbs south of the city. i'll arrange for our meals while you enjoy yourself and educate yourself by looking at the town. you'll find me at the elephant.", "why are you giving me your purse?", "maybe you'll see some little trinket you want to buy. i doubt you've got enough money for little purchases like that.", "i'll hold on to your money and leave you for an hour."], ["we'll meet at the elephant.", "i remember."], ["i've sent for him. he says he'll come. what kind of food should i serve him? what presents should i give him? it's easier to buy young people than to beg or borrow them. oh, i'm talking too loud. where's malvolio? he's very serious, which is right for someone in mourning like me. where is malvolio?", "he's coming, madam; but he's acting very strangely. he must be possessed by the devil.", "why, what's the matter with him? is he talking nonsense?", "no, he just smiles. you should have a guard nearby if he comes in here, because he's clearly disturbed.", "ask him in here.", "i'm as crazy as he is, if sad craziness and happy craziness are equivalent.", "what's going on, malvolio?", "hello, sweet lady."], ["you're smiling? i sent for you about a sad occasion.", "sad, my lady! i could be sad if i wanted to be. these crisscrossing laces do cut off the circulation in my legs a bit, but who cares? as the sonnet says, \"if you please one special person, you please everyone who matters.\"", "why, what's going on? what's the matter with you?", "my legs may be yellow, but i don't feel blue. it was addressed to him, and orders must be obeyed. i think we know whose fancy handwriting that was.", "don't you think you should go to bed, malvolio?", "to bed! \"yes, sweetheart, i'll come to you.\"", "for heaven's sake, why are you smiling like that and kissing your hand so much?", "how are you feeling, malvolio?", "you're asking me! noble people don't answer to peasants!", "why are you acting so brazen toward my lady?", "\"don't be afraid of greatness.\" that was well written.", "what do you mean by that, malvolio?", "\"some are born great \""], ["what?", "\"some achieve greatness \"", "what are you saying?", "\"and some have greatness thrust upon them.\"", "heaven help you!", "\"remember who liked your yellow stockings \"", "your yellow stockings?", "\"and wanted to see you with laces crisscrossed over your legs.\"", "crisscrossed?", "\"go ahead. a happy new life is there if you want it \"", "am i a new life?", "\"if you don't want it, just keep acting like a lowly servant.\"", "this is completely insane.", "madam, count orsino's young messenger has returned. it was hard to get him to come back, but he's here now, waiting for you."], ["i'll go to him.", "maria, take care of this poor fellow here. where's my cousin toby? have some of my servants take care of malvolio. i'd give half my dowry to keep anything bad from happening to him.", "oh ho! look at me now! no less a person than sir toby, lady olivia's own relative, is going to take care of me. this is just what the letter said. she's sending him to me on purpose, so i can be rude to him just like she said in the letter. \"get rid of your low-class trapping,\" she said. \"argue with a relative of mine like a nobleman, and be rude to servants. talk about politics and affairs of state, and act free and independent.\" and then she explains how to do it: i should have a serious face and dignified demeanor, well-modulated speech, acting like a distinguished gentleman and so on. i've got her now, but i've got god to thank for it! and when she left just now, she said \"take care of this poor fellow here.\" fellow!\" not \"malvolio,\" not anything referring to my low station in life, but \"fellow.\" everything's going perfectly. not the tiniest ounce, not the littlest insignificant amount of trouble or bad luck could ruin it what can i say? nothing can come between me and the fulfillment of all my hopes. well, god is responsible for that, not me, and he deserves thanks."], ["where is he, for god's sake? i don't care if all the devils in hell crammed together to possess him, i still want to speak to him.", "here he is, here he is. how are you, sir?", "go away. i don't want to see your face. let me enjoy my privacy. go away.", "sir toby belch ooh, listen to the scary devil speaking from inside him! didn't i tell you? sir toby, lady olivia wants you to take care of him.", "ah-ha! does she?", "fabian maria come on, come on! calm down, calm down. we need to treat him gently. let me take care of this. how are you, malvolio? how are things? come on, man, just say no to the devil! think about it, he's the enemy of mankind.", "do you even know what you're talking about?", "sir toby belch look at that, he acts insulted if you say bad things about the devil! i hope to god he's not bewitched!", "get a urine sample and take it to a witch doctor to find out.", "sure thing, we'll do it tomorrow morning. my lady would never want to lose him.", "what are you saying, mistress?"], ["oh, lord!", "maria please, keep quiet. this is not the way to act. don't you see you're upsetting him? leave me alone with him.", "gentleness is the only way to go gently, gently. the devil inside him is rough, but we can't treat it roughly.", "malvolio so how are you, my pretty little bird? how are you doing in there, sweet little chicken?", "sir!", "yes, dear little chick, come along with me. shut up, man! you're serious enough to know not to play games with satan. damn that dirty black coalminer of a devil!", "get him to say his prayers, sir toby, get him to pray.", "my prayers, you hussy?", "sir toby belch no, i'm telling you, he refuses to hear anything about religion.", "go hang yourselves, all of you! you're all lazy and shallow. i'm not like you. i have a higher future waiting for me. you'll know more about it later."], ["is it possible?", "if this were a play, i'd complain it was unrealistic.", "he's really taken this prank to heart. he's playing the role perfectly.", "no, follow him now, before he divulges the prank and ruins everything.", "wow, we're really going to drive him crazy.", "the house will be so much quieter.", "come on, let's put him in a dark room and tie him up. my niece already thinks he's insane. we can go on like this, punishing him and having some fun, until we're tired of it. then we can take mercy on him and let him out, and talk about how well the joke went. we'll also worship you for setting up this trick. let's do it, let's do it!", "here's more insanity for us.", "here's the challenge, read it. it's bursting with fighting words.", "is it that aggressive?", "yes, it is, i think. just read it."], ["give it to me. \"young man, whatever you are, you're a real scum bucket.\"", "nice. very courageous.", "\"don't even ask why i call you that, because i won't give you any explanation.\"", "that's a good thing to put in it keeps you from getting in trouble with the law.", "\"you come to see the lady olivia, and she's kind to you. but you're a complete liar. that's not why i'm challenging you to a duel.\"", "nice and short and full of good sense or should i say nonsense?", "\"i'll ambush you on your way home, and if you're lucky enough to kill me \"", "good.", "\"you'll be killing me like a common criminal, a mugger.\"", "you still haven't said anything incriminating. good.", "\"good luck, and may god have mercy on one of our souls. he may have mercy upon mine. but i have a better chance of surviving, so watch out. signed, your friend, if you treat him right, and your sworn enemy, andrew aguecheek\""], ["if this letter doesn't make him fight, i don't know what will. i'll give it to him.", "you might have a great opportunity to give it to him right now. he's conducting some business with my lady, and sooner or later he'll leave.", "go, sir andrew. look out for him in the corner of the orchard as if you were a sheriff's deputy. as soon as you see him, draw your sword, and as you draw it, start swearing horribly. sometimes a terrible swear word, like a well-shot arrow, makes you look more brave and manly than getting in a fight would. now go!", "don't worry about me not swearing enough.", "i won't deliver this letter. the young gentleman's behavior shows that he's sensible and has good manners. the fact that he serves as a go-between for his lord and my niece olivia confirms this. so this letter, which is so incredibly stupid and ignorant, isn't going to scare him at all. he'll just think an idiot wrote it. but i'll deliver sir andrew's challenge by word of mouth, describing sir andrew as courageous in battle and convincing the young gentleman that sir andrew is furious, impetuous, and a skilled fighter (he'll believe me because he's young). this will make them both so afraid that they'll kill each other just by looking at each other."], ["here comes the messenger with your niece. leave them alone until he sets off home, and then follow him.", "meanwhile, i'll think of some horrible way to phrase the challenge.", "i've said too much to someone with a heart of stone. i've foolishly jeopardized my honor and reputation. i hate myself for behaving that way, but i just had to, and no criticism could have stopped me.", "my lord acts just as crazy with love as you do.", "here, take this piece of jewelry. there's a picture of me inside. don't refuse it. it won't annoy you like me, because it doesn't have a voice. and i beg you, please come here again tomorrow. what could you possibly ask of me that i wouldn't give you, as long as it didn't damage my honor and self-respect?", "nothing, except your true love for my lord.", "how could i honorably give him what i've already given you?", "i'll give it back to you.", "just come again tomorrow. good-bye. a devil like you could lead me to hell."], ["hello, sir.", "hello to you.", "you'd better think up a way to defend yourself. i don't know what you've done to upset him, but someone has challenged you to a duel. he's riled up and bloodthirsty, and he's waiting for you at the back of the orchard. draw your sword and get on your toes, because your assailant is quick, skillful, and deadly.", "there must be some mistake, sir. i'm sure nobody would have any reason to fight with me. i can't remember anything i've ever done to offend anyone.", "you're wrong about that, i assure you. so if you value your life at all, be on your guard. your opponent has enough youth, strength, skill, and anger to outfight anyone.", "but who is this person, sir?", "he's a knight. he was made a knight because of his court connections, but when he's fighting a civilian he's a real monster. he's killed three people, and he's so furious right now that the only thing that will satisfy him is seeing you die. \"fight to the death\" is his motto."], ["i'll go back inside and ask the lady for some kind of escort. i'm not a fighter. i've heard of men who pick fights with other people on purpose, just to see how brave they are. this man is probably like that.", "no, sir. he's furious because you insulted him, and he has a right to satisfaction. so go out there and give him what he wants. you can't go back into the house unless you want to fight with me and if you're willing to do that, you might as well just go and fight with him. so go to the orchard, or take out your sword right now. you're going to have to fight one way or another, there's no doubt about that, or else you'll have to stop wearing a sword and claiming to be a gentleman.", "this is as rude as it is strange. please, do me this one favor: find out what i've done to offend this knight. it must be something i did accidentally.", "i will do so. mr. fabian, stay with this gentleman until i come back.", "excuse me, sir, do you know anything about this?", "i know the knight is furious with you, so much that he's willing to fight you to the death, but i don't know anything else about it.", "what kind of man is he?", "he's not much to look at, but he's very brave in battle. he really is the most skillful, bloodthirsty, and dangerous opponent you can find in illyria. do you want to go see him? i'll try to calm him down for you if i can."], ["i'd be very grateful to you if you did. i'm much more of a religious type than a fighter, and i don't care who knows it.", "wow, he's a real devil. i've never seen such a monster. i had a round with him, and his sword thrust is so deadly that you can't even duck out of the way. and when he strikes back at you, he'll hit you as sure as you're standing there. they say he used to fence for the shah of persia.", "that's it! i won't mess with him.", "yes, but now there's no way to calm him down. fabian can hardly control him over there.", "darn it, if i'd guessed he was so brave and such a good swordsman, i never would have challenged him. i'll give him my gray horse capilet if he forgets the whole thing.", "i'll give it a try. stay right here and try to look good. this may end without anyone getting killed. i'll ride your horse just like i ride you."], ["fabian he's given me his horse to try to avoid the fight i've persuaded him that the young man is a fighting machine.", "he's just as terrified of sir andrew. he's pale and hyperventilating, as if a bear were chasing him.", "viola there's nothing you can do about it, sir. he insists on fighting with you because he swore he would. but he's thought over his reason for challenging you to fight, and he realizes it's so insignificant that it's not worth thinking about. so draw your sword so he can carry out his vow. he promises not to hurt you.", "god help me! if anything happens i'm going to have to tell them exactly how unmanly i am.", "back off if he seems really furious.", "come on, sir andrew, there's nothing you can do about it. the gentleman insists on fighting a round with you, for the sake of his honor. the rules of dueling say he has to. but as a gentleman and a soldier he's promised me he won't hurt you. come on, get ready.", "i hope to god he keeps his promise!", "i swear to you, i don't want to be doing this.", "put your sword away. if this young gentleman has offended you, i'll take the blame for it. if you've offended him, i'll fight you."], ["you, sir? who are you?", "i'm just a good friend of his. in fact, i'd do even more to him than what you've heard him promise to do.", "if you're someone who gets into fights, i'll fight with you.", "oh, sir toby, stop! the police are here.", "antonio i'll be back for you soon.", "andrew please, sir, put away your sword. please.", "i certainly will, sir. and as for what i promised to you, i'm as good as my word. you can ride him easily, and he responds well when you pull the reins.", "this is the man. do your job.", "antonio, you're under arrest on the orders of count orsino.", "you must be mistaking me for someone else, sir.", "no, sir, not at all. i recognize your face perfectly, even without a sailor's cap on your head. take him away. he knows i recognize him.", "i have to obey. viola this has happened because i came looking for you, but there's nothing i can do about it now. i'll take what's coming to me. but what'll you do now that i have to ask you for my purse back?"], ["i'm more upset about not being able to help you than i am about what's going to happen to me. you look so confused. don't worry about me.", "come on, sir, let's go.", "viola really, i must ask you for some of that money.", "what money, sir? i feel sorry for you in this situation, and i want to thank you for the kindness you've shown me here, so i'll lend you some of my money, though i don't have much. i'll give you half of everything i have right now. take this. it's half of all my money.", "are you really going to pretend you don't know me now? after everything i've done for you, you're refusing to help me? don't make me more miserable than i am. i might do something really weak and unmanly, like listing the kind things i've done for you.", "i don't know any kind things you've done for me, and i don't recognize your voice or your face. i hate an ungrateful man more than i hate lying, vanity, babbling, drunkenness, or any other vice that we feeble human beings are susceptible to.", "oh, my god!", "come on, sir, please. let's go."], ["no, i've got something to say. i saved this young man's life when he was half-dead, and nursed him back to health lovingly and tenderly. i devoted myself to him, since he looked noble and good.", "why should we care? time's passing. let's go!", "but oh, what a deceiver he turned out to be! you don't live up to your good looks, sebastian. you look good but you're bad on the inside, where it counts, since the only real flaws in nature are in a person's mind and soul. only really cruel people can be called deformed. virtue is beauty, but someone beautiful and wicked is like an empty box decorated by the devil.", "the man's going crazy. take him away. come on, sir. come on.", "take me.", "he was so angry i feel he must really believe what he was saying. i don't believe it. yet i wish i could. oh, please be true, please let it be that this man has mistaken me for you, my dear brother!", "come here, sir andrew. you too, fabian. we've got some words of wisdom to mull over.", "he called me sebastian. i know my brother's still alive in a sense, since i see him whenever i look in the mirror. my brother looked like me, and he dressed the same way that i'm dressed now in the same colors,"], ["with the same accessories. oh, if it turns out to be true that he survived, then that storm was kind, and the ocean was full of love!", "he's a very dishonest, puny boy, and more cowardly than a rabbit. he abandoned his friend here in an emergency, and even pretended he didn't know him. that shows he's dishonest. as for his cowardliness, ask fabian.", "he's a coward, a total coward. he's religiously devoted to his cowardice.", "by god, i'll go after him again and beat him up.", "please do. beat him up well, but don't draw your sword.", "i swear i will", "come on, let's go see what happens.", "i'll bet anything you like that nothing will happen, once again."], ["are you trying to tell me that i wasn't sent to get you?", "oh, who cares, you're acting like a fool. leave me alone.", "good for you, holding out on me like this! no, i don't know you, and my lady didn't send me to get you, and i'm not supposed to tell you to come speak with her, and your name is not master cesario, and this is not my nose, either. nothing is what it is.", "oh please, go somewhere else to blab your nonsense. you don't know me.", "blab my nonsense? he must've heard that phrase describing some great man and now he's using it on a jester. blab my nonsense! what an idiotic place this world is. now please stop being so strange and tell me what exactly i should blab to my lady. should i blab to her that you're coming?", "please, fool, go away. here's money for you. if you stay any longer, i'll give you something worse.", "well, well. you're a generous man. wise men who give fools money might get a good reputation if they keep up regular payments for fourteen years."], ["well, sir, we meet again? take that.", "well, then, take that, and that, and that. is everyone here insane?", "stop right now or i'll throw your dagger over the roof.", "i'm going to tell my lady about this right away. i wouldn't be in any of your shoes if you paid me.", "sebastian come on, sir, stop!", "no, leave him alone. i'll get back at him another way. i'll sue him for assault and battery, if there's any justice in illyria. it doesn't matter that i hit him first.", "sir toby belch let me go.", "no, sir, i won't let you go. come on, put your sword away, my little soldier. you're awfully eager to fight. come on.", "i'll get free of you."], ["what are you going to do now? if you insist on trying my patience any further, then take out your sword right now.", "what? no. because then i'd have to shed an ounce or two of your impudent blood.", "stop, sir toby! i order you to stop!", "madam!", "are you always going to be like this? you're an ungrateful slob who's only fit to live in the mountains, in caves far from civilized people where you won't ever need good manners! get out of my sight! dear cesario, please don't be offended. get out of here, you barbarian!", "oh, my dear friend, please don't get too upset by these rude people who bothered you. come with me to my house. i'll tell you about all the pointless, clumsy pranks this thug uncle of mine has come up with, so that you can laugh at this one. you have to come with me. please don't say no. damn that toby! he made my heart leap for you.", "what does this mean? where is this all going? either i'm insane or this is a dream. i hope these"], ["delusions continue. if this is a dream, let me keep on sleeping!", "come with me, please. i wish you'd do what i ask!", "madam, i will.", "oh, say it, and mean it!"], ["no, i'm telling you, put on this robe and beard. make him think you're sir topas the priest. be quick. meanwhile, i'll get sir toby.", "well, i'll put it on and disguise myself. i wish i were the first person who ever told lies in a priest's robe.", "i'm not tall enough to make a believable priest, or skinny enough to look like a good student. but if you're an honest man and a good host, that's almost as good as being moral and studious. here come the conspirators.", "god bless you, mr. priest.", ", sir toby. as the old hermit of prague, who couldn't read or write, said very wittily to a niece of king gorboduc, \"whatever is, is.\" so since i'm mr. priest, i'm mr. priest. because isn't \"that\" \"that,\" and isn't \"is\" \"is\"?", "go to him, sir topas."], ["quiet down in this prison!", "the fool's a good actor. a good fool.", "who's shouting?", "i'm sir topas the priest. i've come to visit malvolio the lunatic.", "sir topas, sir topas, good sir topas, please go find my lady olivia", "get out, demon! why are you bothering this poor man! can't you talk about anything besides ladies?", "well said, mr. priest.", "sir topas, nobody's ever been as badly treated as i've been. good sir topas, don't believe i'm insane, they've shut me up here in horrible darkness.", "you should be ashamed of yourself, satan, you liar! i'm being gentle with you, because i'm one of those good-hearted people who are polite to the devil himself. you call this house dark?", "dark as hell, sir topas.", "but it has bay windows that are as transparent as stone walls, and the upper windows facing south-north are as clear as coal. but you're still complaining of darkness and a bad view?", "i'm not insane, sir topas. i'm telling you, this house is dark."], ["you're wrong, you madman. there's no darkness except ignorance, and you're more ignorant than the egyptians during the plague of fog.", "i tell you, this house is as dark as ignorance. and i tell you, no man has ever been treated worse than me. i'm no more insane than you are, and i'll prove it. ask me any commonsense question.", "what was the philosopher pythagoras's belief about wild birds?", "that our grandmother's soul could end up inhabiting a bird.", "what do you think of his belief?", "i respect the soul very much, so i disagree with his belief.", "well then, goodbye. stay in the dark. i'll only admit that you're sane when you agree with pythagoras and hesitate to kill a bird because it might contain your grandmother's soul. goodbye.", "sir topas, sir topas!", "the brilliant sir topas!", "i can do anything!", "you could've done this without your beard and gown. he couldn't see you."], ["now talk to him in your own voice, and tell me how he is. i wish this trick would be over. if we can find a convenient way to let him go, i want to do it. i'm in so much trouble with my niece that it wouldn't be safe to let this prank go to its conclusion. come to my room later on.", "", "fool!", "", "fool!", "", "fool, i say!", "", "good fool, good jester, i'll make it worth your while if you get me a candle, and a pen, ink and paper. you have my word as a gentleman that i'll always be grateful to you.", "master malvolio?", "yes, good fool."], ["poor man, how did you go insane?", "fool, no one has ever been as mistreated as i am. i'm completely sane, fool. i'm as sane as you are.", "as sane as me? then you really are insane, if you're no saner than a fool.", "they treat me like garbage here. they keep me in darkness, and send idiotic priests to talk to me those asses! and do everything they can to insist i'm insane.", "be careful what you say the priest is here. malvolio, malvolio, may heaven make you sane again! try to sleep, and stop your pointless babbling.", "sir topas!", "don't talk to him, my friend. who, me, sir? not me, sir. god be with you, sir topas, goodbye. well then, amen. goodbye, sir.", "fool, fool, hey, fool!", "please, sir, be quiet. what do you want to say, sir? i've just been scolded for speaking to you.", "be a nice fool and help me find a candle and some paper. i tell you, i'm as sane as any man in illyria.", "if only you were, sir."], ["i swear i am. get me some ink, paper, and a candle. i'll write a letter and you'll take it to my lady. you'll get a bigger reward than you ever got delivering a letter before.", "i'll help you. but tell me honestly, are you sure you're not insane? or are you just pretending?", "believe me, i'm not. i'm telling the truth.", "i'll never believe a madman until i can see his brains. but i'll get you a candle and paper and ink.", "fool, i'll repay you for this favor. please, hurry.", ""], ["this is the air, that's the glorious sun. i can feel and see this pearl she gave me. i may be dazed and confused, but i'm not insane. where's antonio, then? i didn't find him at the elephant. but he'd been there before me, and they told me he'd gone out looking for me. i could really use his advice right now. i feel sure this situation is due to some mistake, and i don't think i'm crazy. but this sudden flood of good luck is so unbelievable that i'm ready to distrust my own eyes and my own rational mind when they tell me i'm not insane maybe the lady's insane. but if that were the case, she wouldn't be able to run her house, command her servants, listen to reports, make decisions, and take care of business as smoothly as she does. there's something going on that's not what it seems. but here she comes."], ["sebastian don't be angry with me for acting so quickly. if your intentions toward me are honorable, come with me and this holy man into the chapel over there, where you can soothe all my worries by making your marriage vows to me. the priest will keep it secret until you're ready to make the news public and we can throw a full marriage celebration that befits my social standing. what do you say?", "i'll follow the priest and go with you; and after i've sworn to be faithful, i'll be faithful forever.", "then lead the way, father. i want the skies bright and shining to show its approval of our wedding."], ["if you're my friend, you'll let me see his letter.", "dear mr. fabian, do me another favor first.", "anything.", "don't ask to see this letter.", "that's like giving someone a dog as a present, and then asking for the dog back in return.", "my friends, are you all lady olivia's servants?", "yes, sir, we're part of her entourage.", "i know you. how are you, my friend?", "i'm better off because of my enemies, and worse off because of my friends.", "you mean it the other way around. you're better off because of your friends.", "no, sir, worse off.", "how can that be?"], ["well, my friends praise me and make me look like an idiot, while my enemies tell me straightforwardly that i am an idiot. my enemies help me understand myself better, which is an advantage, and my friends help me lie about myself, which is a disadvantage. so if four negatives make two affirmatives, i'm worse off because of my friends and better off because of my foes.", "that's excellent.", "don't say that unless you want to be one of my friends.", "you won't be worse off because of me: here's some money.", "that's a nice hand you dealt me. but if it's not double-dealing, sir, i wish you'd deal me another.", "oh, you're a naughty one, encouraging double-dealing.", "ignore your virtue and nobility just this once, sir, go ahead.", "well, i'll commit the sin of double-dealing, and deal you a second coin. here it is.", "and maybe a third? you know, there's a game called \"third time's the charm,\" which is fun to play, and they always say that three's a magic number. the three-beat rhythm is a good for dancing, and the church bells chime one, two, three."], ["you can't get any more money out of me right now. if you tell your lady i'm here to speak with her, and bring her out with you when you come back, you might make me more generous.", "well then, sing a lullaby to your generosity: it'll nap until i come back. but don't think i'm doing this because i'm greedy. i'll be back soon to wake up your generosity.", "here comes the man who rescued me, sir.", "i remember his face well. though the last time i saw him it was black from the smoke of war. he was the captain of a flimsy boat that was practically worthless because it was so small. but with that tiny boat he fought such a fierce battle against the largest warship in our fleet that we had to admire his courage and skill even though he caused us a lot of damage. what's going on?", "orsino, this is the same antonio who took the and her cargo from crete and captured our ship the during the battle where your young nephew titus lost his leg. we arrested him here for fighting in the streets. it's as if he didn't care we were on the lookout for him here."], ["he was kind to me and took my side in the fight. but then he said strange things to me. he might be insane. i don't know what else it could be.", "but you're a famous pirate! a master thief of the seas! what made you stupid and careless enough to come visit the people you robbed and slaughtered?", "orsino, sir, please don't call me those names. i was never a thief or a pirate, though i admit i was your enemy for good reasons. i came here because someone put a spell on me. i rescued that ungrateful boy next to you from drowning. he was a wreck, almost past hope. i saved his life and gave him my love, without reservation. i dedicated myself to him. for his sake i ran the risk of revisiting this unfriendly town, and i drew my sword to defend him when he was in trouble. but when the police caught us, he was clever and treacherous enough to pretend he'd never met me before. he acted like someone who barely knew me. he refused to give me my own wallet, which i had lent him only half an hour before.", "how is that possible?", "antonio when did he come to town?"], ["today, my lord. and for three months before that, we spent every day and night together.", "ah, the countess is coming! an angel is walking on earth. but as for you, mister, what you're saying is insane. this young man has worked for me for three months; but more about that later. take him away.", "what can i give you that you want, my lord, except the one thing you can't have? cesario, you missed your appointment with me.", "madam?", "dearest olivia", "what do you have to say for yourself, cesario? my lord, please", "my lord wants to speak. it's my duty to be quiet.", "if what you have to say is anything like what you used to say, it'll be as repulsive to my ears as wild screams after beautiful music.", "are you still so cruel?", "i am still so faithful, my lord."], ["what, faithful to being mean and nasty? you're not polite! i breathed from my soul the most faithful offerings to your ungrateful altars that any devoted person has ever offered what more am i supposed to do?", "you can do whatever you want as long as it's socially appropriate.", "maybe i should act like the egyptian thief who kills the woman he loves before he dies? that kind of savage jealousy sometimes seems noble. but listen to me. since you keep denying the love i feel for you, and since i know who's stealing my place in your heart, you can go on being cold-hearted, but i'm going to take this boy from you. he knows his master loves you. i'm doing this, even though he's dear to me, because i know you love him. come with me, boy. i'm ready to do something extreme. i'll sacrifice this boy i care for, just to spite a beautiful woman with a heart of stone.", "and i would die a thousand deaths cheerfully, if it made your life easier.", "where's cesario going?", "following the one i love more than my eyes or my life. more than i will ever love a wife. that's the truth. the angels in heaven are my witnesses, and can see how pure my love is."], ["ah, how awful, i feel so used! i've been tricked!", "who tricked you? who treated you badly?", "have you completely forgotten? has it been so long? call the priest.", "viola come on, let's go!", "go where, my lord? cesario, my husband, stay here.", "husband?", "yes, husband. can he deny it?", "are you her husband, boy?", "no, my lord, not me.", "you're afraid, so you hide your identity. but don't be afraid, cesario. accept the good luck that's come your way. be the person you know you are, and you'll be as powerful as this person you fear.", "oh, hello, father! father, could i please ask you to tell these people what happened between me and this young man? (i know we wanted to hide it, but now the situation demands that we reveal everything.)"], ["they were joined in an eternal bond of love and matrimony, and it was confirmed by a holy kiss and an exchange of rings. i witnessed it all as priest. it took place just two hours ago.", "viola oh, you little liar! how much worse will you be when you're older? maybe you'll get so good at deceit that your tricks will destroy you. goodbye, and take her. just never set foot in any place where you and i might happen to meet.", "my lord, i swear to you", "oh, don't swear! keep a little bit of honesty, even if you're afraid.", "for the love of god, call a doctor! sir toby needs help right away.", "what's the matter?", "he cut my head and gave sir toby a bloody head, too. for the love of god, help us! i'd give forty pounds to be safe at home right now.", "who did this, sir andrew?"], ["the count's messenger, cesario. we thought he was a coward, but he fights like a devil.", "my cesario?", "oh, no, there he is! you cut my head for no reason. anything i did to you, i did it because sir toby made me.", "why are you talking like this? i never hurt you. you waved your sword at me for no reason, but i was nice to you. i didn't hurt you.", "if a bloody head counts as a hurt, then you hurt me. apparently you think there's nothing unusual about a bloody head.", "here comes sir toby, limping. he'll tell you more of the story. if he hadn't been drunk, he would've really roughed you up.", "hello, sir! how are you?", "it doesn't matter how i am: he hurt me, and that's that. fool fool, have you seen dick the surgeon?", "oh, he's drunk, sir toby, for a whole hour now. his eyes started glazing over around eight in the morning.", "then he's no good. i hate no-good drunks."], ["take him away! who did this to him?", "i'll help you, sir toby. they'll treat our wounds together.", "will you help me? what an ass and a fool, a gullible no-good idiot!", "get him to bed and make sure his wounds are treated.", "i'm sorry, madam. i wounded your relative. but i would've been forced to do the same thing to my brother, since my safety was at stake. you're looking at me strangely, so i guess you're offended. but please forgive me, darling, for the sake of the vows we made to each other so recently.", "one face, one voice, one way of dressing, but two people! it's like an optical illusion. it is and isn't the same person!", "antonio, oh my dear antonio! i've been so tortured since i lost track of you!", "are you sebastian?", "do you have any doubts, antonio?"], ["how did you divide yourself in two? these two people are as identical as two halves of an apple. which one is sebastian?", "how unbelievable!", "viola is that me standing over there? i never had a brother, and i'm certainly not a god who can be in two places at once. i had a sister who drowned. please tell me, how am i related to you? are you from my country? what's your name? who are your parents?", "i'm from messaline. sebastian was my father's name, and my brother was named sebastian too. he was dressed just like you are when he drowned. if ghosts can take on someone's body and clothes, you must be a spirit who's come to frighten us.", "i am a spirit, yes, since i have a soul. but my spirit has a body attached to it, one that i've carried since i was in the womb. if you were a woman, i'd hug you now and cry, and say \"welcome back, drowned viola!\"", "my father had a mole on his forehead.", "mine did too.", "he died on viola's thirteenth birthday."], ["oh, i remember that very clearly! it's true, he died on the day my sister turned thirteen.", "if the only thing keeping us from rejoicing is the fact that i'm wearing men's clothes, then don't hug me till i can prove beyond the shadow of a doubt that i'm viola. i'll take you to a sea captain here in town who's got my women's clothing in storage. he saved my life so i could serve this noble count. everything that's happened to me since then has involved my relationship with this lady and this lord.", "olivia so you got it wrong, my lady. but nature fixed everything, turning your love for my sister into a love for me. if you hadn't, you would've married a maiden. but that's not completely wrong. i'm still a virgin, so in a sense i'm a maiden too.", "olivia don't be shocked. his blood is noble. if this is all as true as it seems to be, then i'm going to have a share in that lucky shipwreck. viola boy, you told me a thousand times you'd never love a woman as much as you love me.", "everything i said before i'll say again. i swear i meant every word.", "give me your hand and let me see you dressed in woman's clothing."], ["the captain who brought me to shore has my women's clothes. for some reason he's in prison now on some legal technicality, on malvolio's orders. malvolio is a gentleman in my lady's entourage.", "he'll release him.", "go and get malvolio but, oh no! now i remember, they say the poor man is mentally ill. i was so crazy myself that i forgot all about him. fool how is malvolio doing, do you know?", "well, he keeps the devil away as well as a man can in his situation. he's written you a letter. i would've given it to you this morning, but a madman's letters aren't gospel, so it doesn't matter much if i'm a bit late.", "open it and read it.", "there's a lot to learn when a fool recites the words of a madman. \"i swear to god, madam,\"", "why are you talking like that? are you insane?", "no, madam, i'm just reading an insane letter. if you want things done in the right way, you'll have to let me read a crazy letter in a crazy voice.", "no, please, read it like a sane person."], ["i will, my lady, but a sane person reading this would make it sound crazy. so listen up, princess.", "fabian oh, you read it, sir.", "\"i swear to god, madam, you've wronged me, and i'll tell the whole world. you've shut me up in a dark room and given your drunken cousin authority over me, but i'm as sane as you are. i've got a letter from you encouraging me to act the way i did. if i didn't have it, i couldn't prove that i'm right and you're wrong. i don't care what you think of me. i'm going to forget my duties to you a little bit and complain about the injuries you've caused me. signed, the poorly treated malvolio.\"", "did he write this?", "yes, madam.", "it doesn't sound like an insane person's letter.", "set him free. fabian, bring him here.", "my lord, i hope that after you think things over a bit you'll come to like the idea of having me as a sister-in-law instead of a wife. we can have the weddings tomorrow if you want, here at my own house. i'll pay for everything."], ["i accept that offer happily, madam. viola so you're free now. i'm offering you my hand in marriage because of your loyal service to me, which was far from what any woman should be expected to do, especially a noble woman. you've called me \"master\" for so long. and now you'll be your master's mistress.", "viola you'll be my sister-in-law!", "is this the madman?", "yes, my lord. how are you, malvolio?", "madam, you've treated me badly, very badly.", "i did, malvolio? no.", "olivia you did. please have a look at this letter. you can't deny that it's your handwriting. go ahead and try to write differently, and try to pretend that's not your seal with your design on it. you can't. so just admit it. and tell me honestly, why did you show me such fondness and asked me to smile at you, wear yellow stockings and crisscrossed laces for you, and be rude to sir toby and the servants?"], ["and then tell me why you imprisoned me in a dark house after i followed your instructions perfectly. you made me look like the biggest fool that anybody ever tricked. tell me why you did it.", "i'm sorry, malvolio, but this isn't my writing, though i admit it looks like mine. it's definitely maria's handwriting. now that i think about it, maria was the one who first told me you were insane. that's when you came in smiling at me, dressed up like the letter said, and acting just like it told you to act. someone has played a very mean trick on you, but when we find out who's responsible, you won't just be the victim, but the judge who sentences the culprit. i promise.", "madam, let me say something. please don't let squabbles ruin this beautiful and miraculous moment. i confess that toby and i were the ones who tricked malvolio because we hated his strict and heavy-handed ways. sir toby had maria wrote that letter, and he married her as a reward. we should just laugh about the whole thing rather than get upset about it, especially if we consider that each of the two parties offended the other equally.", "malvolio oh, poor fool, they've really humiliated you!"], ["well, you know, \"some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them.\" anyway, i was part of the trick, sir. i pretended to be a priest named sir topas. but what does it matter? malvolio \"i swear, fool, i'm not crazy.\" but do you remember what he said about me before? \"i'm surprised you enjoy the company of this stupid troublemaker unless he's got somebody laughing at him, he can't think of anything to say.\" what goes around comes around.", "i'll get my revenge on every last one of you.", "he really was tricked horribly.", "go after him and try to calm him down a little.", "he still hasn't told us about the captain. when that's been taken care of and the time is right, we'll all get married. until then, we'll stay here, my dear sister-in-law. cesario, come here. i'll keep calling you cesario while you're still a man, but when we see you in women's clothes you'll be the queen of my dreams, orsino's true love."], [""]]]